American Studies and 
Environmental History: 
Provoking Thought and Practice 
Rendra D. Smith 
In a 2002 article titled "Conceptualizing the Real," Hal Rothman skillfully 
details the development of the field of environmental history and its intersections 
with American studies. He laments that "American studies has become theory 
and identity; in the process it has lost something valuable, the grounding that 
environmental history can provide."1 Rothman is right to assert that the fields of 
American studies and environmental history benefit from common intellectual 
engagement, yet his comments suggest that despite some exceptions, a nearly 
irreconcilable rift has developed between the fields. In fact, scholars within the 
fields of environmental history and American studies continue to have as many 
similarities as differences in content, methods, and mission. As scholars of both 
fields have refined the definitions of "culture" and "nature" and rearticulated 
the relationship between the two, they tread on similar academic terrain. Despite 
Rothman's distinction between theoretical American studies and materialist 
environmental history, practitioners of American studies and environmental 
history alike have sought avenues to link theoretical insights with material realities 
and to illustrate how identities are embodied and reflected in the natural world. 
Moreover, scholars in both fields have had a sense of mission about their 
intellectual work and have embraced opportunities to take their knowledge 
outside of the academy. As a result, both fields face a similar challenge of how 
to address the role of human agency in cultivating ecological and cultural change.2 
0026-3079/2005/4601-005S2.50/0 American Studies, 46:1 (Spring 2005): 5-22 
5 
 6 Kendra D. Smith 
Rothman's review offers vague guidelines for how American studies and 
environmental history scholars might renew their partnership with one another, 
but an invigorated dialogue between American studies and environmental history 
must also address the relationship between thought and practice. 
American studies and environmental history scholars provoke readers to 
reconsider the relationship between thought and practice because their works 
echo the assertions of early American pragmatists like John Dewey for whom, 
according to Nicholas Brommel, "thinking is seen not as a distinction from, but 
as an extension of, experience."3 Perhaps more than any other fields, 
environmental history and American studies illustrate the processes through 
which thinking is actualized in space, embodied in environments, and put to 
work in the world. Because American studies and environmental history illustrate 
the relationship between ideas and their consequences in the larger world so 
keenly, scholars in both fields need to be mindful of the ways in which their own 
thinking may be actualized and experienced. In other words, while part of 
American studies and environmental history's common work is to "conceptualize 
the real," the fields are also uniquely positioned to ask readers to "realize the 
concept." How do environmental history and American studies scholars and 
their narratives inform and inspire readers to act in the world? This essay 
highlights three approaches that will promote continued dialogue between 
American studies and environmental history scholars and also addresses the 
fields' responsibilities to engage their readers thoughtfully and experientially: 
tracing the cultural and natural processes of consumption and production; 
exploring the importance of places in the formation of ideas; and using the 
model of "co-production" to investigate the simultaneous global and local 
manifestations of ecological and cultural change. 
Although American studies scholars and environmental historians alike have 
produced scholarship about the relationship between nature and culture, it would 
be disingenuous to deny that anxiety still exists among practitioners of both 
fields about what an environmentally conscious cultural studies or culturallyattentive
environmental history might look like. Scholars voice concern about 
whether nature or culture should be central to the narratives they create. Some 
environmental historians express unease about studies that emphasize the cultural 
construction of nature because they believe that such studies will discount nature's 
materiality and agency. One of the great innovations of environmental history is 
recognizing that humans exist as only one species within a larger natural world. 
Therefore, some environmental history scholars fear that putting culture—rather 
than nature—at the center of environmental history would invalidate its 
contribution to historical scholarship.4 Some American studies scholars, on the 
other hand, fear that environmental history narratives that stress nature's 
transformative effects on human culture slight the plurality of individual human 
experiences with the environment—and especially the cultural influences of 
race, gender, and class. A number of American studies researchers also feel that 
 American Studies and Environmental History 7 
environmental historians could better integrate issues of power into their 
narratives.5 
Perceived differences about the fields' methodology also raise concerns. 
Many American studies scholars guard against environmental history's tendency 
towards materialism, while numerous environmental historians are wary of 
American studies' proclivity for abstract theory. But these generalized statements 
mask the variety of works in both fields. Environmental historians might be 
surprised to learn that the field of American studies has a long history of studying 
material culture as well as theory. In fact, it was within American studies that 
environmental historians who have the most materialist slant—Donald Worster 
and Alfred Crosby—found a home for their early works.6 By the same token, 
despite the importance of materiality to many environmental history narratives, 
environmental historians have used the insights of some of cultural studies' key 
figures—like E.P. Thompson, Raymond Williams, and Leo Marx—to articulate 
the cultural and historical construction of the idea of nature and identify how 
particular cultural groups related to the natural world.7 
Finally, some American studies and environmental history scholars perceive 
that their own commitments to different ethical and political projects— 
environmentalism vs. social justice—prevent common intellectual engagement.8 
In fact, environmental history and American studies scholars' moral and ethical 
concerns have as much in common as not, because both sets of scholars face a 
similar problem: determinism. Determinist narratives are a persistent thorn in 
the side of both sets of scholars who consider their intellectual work to be a 
public or political act, because determinism belies the notion that individual or 
collective action can make a difference. When American studies and 
environmental history scholars write deterministic histories, they fail to create a 
place for human agency in shaping natural systems and social change. To 
reconcile the differences between American studies and environmental history, 
scholars must not only look for ways in which environmental and social problems 
are related, but also to look for theoretical frameworks that acknowledge the 
role of individuals in creating change in cultural, economic, and environmental 
systems. Rather than dwell on the differences in political agenda, scholars from 
both fields would benefit from a shared effort to figure out ways to recognize 
the possibilities for action within systems of nature and culture. 
Three approaches seem suited to bridging the material and ideal elements 
of the nature-culture relationship, promoting the exchange of ideas between 
American studies and environmental history, and, most important, addressing 
the issue of human agency in narratives: an approach that traces the cultural and 
natural processes of consumption and production; one that explores the 
importance of places in the formation of ideas; and one that simultaneously 
investigates the global and local manifestations of ecological and cultural change. 
By considering the material and ideal elements of human-environment 
interactions as one process and by being attentive to human agency in their 
 8 Kendra D. Smith 
narratives, American studies scholars and environmental historians could provide 
narratives about people and the environment that inspire both thought and 
practice. 
The Culture and Nature of Production and Consumption 
Environmental historians and American studies scholars have already 
identified the juncture between production and consumption as a fruitful one 
for exploration of human-environment interactions. In 2002, the American 
Society for Environmental History titled its annual conference "Producing and 
Consuming Natures." Interest in consumer practices among environmental 
historians has arisen as the field has shifted in the last twenty years from studying 
nature as a place apart towards uncovering the history of the landscapes of 
everyday life.9 Works such as William Cronon's Nature's Metropolis, Richard 
Tucker's Insatiable Appetite, and Adam Rome's The Bulldozer in the 
Countryside, link the environmental and social impacts of commodity production 
to the ordinary household goods Americans purchase. In so doing, these works 
expose the environmental impacts of mass consumption. These histories open 
up the field, because commodified nature reaches into almost every reader's 
experience of everyday life. Sometimes these histories of turning nature into 
commodities lack much detail about how individuals engaged market systems, 
because they identify "the economy" as the key actor in changing ideas towards 
nature. Nevertheless, they have helped establish the groundwork to move 
environmental history beyond a set of histories of extractive industries (mining, 
logging, fishing) and towards an exploration of the innumerable relationships 
between nature and culture forged through consumption and modern work.10 
Expanding the scope of environmental history to include consumption and 
modern work has moral implications. The recent scholarship in environmental 
history has made it impossible for urban or suburban consumers to consider 
themselves disentangled from the web of resource extraction and to implicate 
only the extractive industries for environmental degradation. Humans use 
nature—as producers and consumers—whether they live in country or city, work 
with a backhoe or a laptop, or play with video games or Peterson's field guides.l ] 
Environmental historians have made great strides towards including a wider 
variety of human-environment interactions in their histories, but opportunities 
abound for continued intellectual engagement. 
American studies scholarship has also turned towards consumerism in recent 
years, using objects of material culture to analyze cultural values as well as 
material exchanges. American studies, especially its branch of material culture, 
has long provided an environment for cross-disciplinary investigations of the 
role of objects in the formation of culture.12 These material culture scholars 
shared the assumption that objects were more than merely raw materials that 
met human needs for subsistence. Rather, they believed that goods "are needed 
for making visible and stable the categories of culture."13 
 American Studies and Environmental History 9 
To this end, American studies scholars have revealed the ways in which 
objects have helped to mediate relationships, provided a means for individual 
expression, and been incorporated into shared rituals. Philip Deloria's Playing 
Indian explains that by donning a disguise or trading Indian artifacts, white 
middle-class Americans confronted and communicated ideas about authenticity 
and the American nation.14 Works such as Lizabeth Cohen's Making a New 
Deal and George Lipsitz's Rainbow at Midnight, suggest that particular consumer 
practices of workers provided a common language from which they constructed 
class identity.15 But if consumerism forged worker unity, it could also create 
division. Nayan Shah explains in Contagious Divides: Epidemics and Race in 
San Francisco's Chinatown that when California labor leaders affixed union 
labels on cigars and clothing, they identified unlabeled clothing with Chinese 
workers whom they excluded from labor protection. Hence, by buying unionlabeled
products, consumers affirmed a foundational ideology of racial 
exclusion.16 Often, consumerism provided the materials for individuals to 
negotiate multi-faceted identities. George Sanchez's Becoming Mexican 
American explains that Mexican-Americans' purchases of consumer goods 
enabled them to adapt and amalgamate cultures of the United States and Mexico, 
while Nan Enstad's Ladies of Labor, Girls ofAdventure, reveals how New York 
City garment workers' purchases of fiction and fashion enabled them to affirm 
their identities as workers and as women.17 By examining consumerism within 
its social and cultural context, these works have helped clarify the role of goods 
in constituting cultural categories of race, class, and gender. 
As mass commodities have come to the center of both environmental history 
and American studies analyses, most scholars have either traced the stories of 
the goods' transformative effects on the environment or their cultural meanings. 
But a few exemplary works have integrated commodities into both their natural 
and cultural context. Jennifer Price's Flight Maps: Adventures with Nature in 
Modern America, for example, employs the concrete materials of pigeon pies, 
shopping malls, and pink flamingos to construct a cultural history about ideas 
of nature, authenticity, and taste. Price's book revisits familiar stories of 
environmental history—such as the extinction of the passenger pigeon and the 
development of the Audubon Society. But her history sheds new light on these 
well-known tales, because the analysis consistently searches to uncover the 
cultural ideals that motivated individuals to act in the environment. Rather than 
deride pigeon hunters or scorn plastic-flamingo purchasers, Price's history digs 
into the primary documents to uncover what shooting a pigeon or planting a 
plastic flamingo meant to late nineteenth or mid-twentieth century Americans. 
Her analysis thereby helps us to understand the people who consumed these 
objects, not just the materials or ideas transformed by production and 
consumption.18 Price's work also points towards important questions yet to be 
fully answered by environmental historians and American studies scholars, such 
as: What human values guided uses and abuses of nature? How did uses of 
 10 Kendra D. Smith 
nature vary among different groups of people, in specific places, at particular 
points of time? In what ways were these practices learned, cultivated, carried 
out? 
As environmental historians and American studies scholars uncover the 
material impacts of consumer goods, they also need to situate the processes of 
production within their cultural contexts, because the same processes of 
industrialization that obscure the ecological pasts of consumer goods also conceal 
the cultural values underlying production systems. American studies and 
environmental history scholars have already provided multiple models for this 
kind of scholarship. Frieda Knobloch's The Culture of Wilderness: Agriculture 
as Colonization in the American West bares the cultural roots of agriculture, 
showing that agriculture is a social enterprise, not just a material one.19 In Every 
Farm a Factory: The Industrial Ideal in American Agriculture, Deborah 
Fitzgerald similarly traces the important role of the ideals of agricultural 
engineering and economics as drivers of the industrialization of farming in the 
mid twentieth-century.20 
By identifying the unnoticed assumptions that lie beneath production 
systems, these works suggest that economic systems exist in a cultural context. 
Economies depend on a set of choices that individuals and communities make 
about how to allocate tasks, distribute products, use goods, and compensate one 
another for labor.21 When "the economy" is understood on cultural terms, it can 
be seen not as a deterministic force against which individuals are powerless, but 
as a system created by individuals and communities through their actions and 
ideals. Histories attentive to the cultural and material elements of economies 
thereby assure readers that they can and do indeed live out their values. 
Places Create Knowledge and Ideas Shape Spaces 
A second way in which American studies and environmental history scholars 
have forged connections between the ideal and material elements of the natureculture
relationship is by building on the theoretical contention that people come 
to know by living in place. The works of Michel Foucalt and Donna Haraway 
provide some of the theoretical underpinnings for this body of scholarship. 
American studies scholars and environmental historians have creatively refined 
the theorists' key insights and could continue to develop theories and practices 
about thinking and doing in nature.22 
Michel Foucault 's works provide one example of how ideologies construct 
spaces and spaces communicate ideals. He contends that medical and state agents 
wield power that is dispersed through physical spaces such as asylums, prisons, 
schools, hospitals, and bodies, thereby silencing and constraining alternatives 
to normality.23 Foucault's attention to places as sites of power offers an important 
insight to scholars studying space.24 And yet, as the sphere of normalizing power 
widens to encompass almost all spaces in Foucault's analyses, his explanation 
 American Studies and Environmental History 11 
for how power operates becomes as diffuse and vague as the power he describes. 
Moreover, by asserting that normalizing power penetrates all places, Foucault's 
framework stifles the possibility that individuals or communities could construct 
spaces to become sites of liberation, resistance, empowerment, or inspiration. 
He thereby leaves much room for environmental historians and American studies 
scholars to describe the multiple ways in which places communicate power and 
knowledge to those who inhabit them. 
A number of scholars have identified the ways in which particular sites 
communicate cultural messages. Like myths or symbols, spaces convey collective 
representations of culture, but spaces enable cultural ideals not only to be 
represented, but also to be performed. Marguerite Shaffer's See America First: 
Tourism and National Identity, 1880-1940 suggests that landscapes such as 
national parks and auto-touring routes enshrined national traditions and provided 
sites for travelers to legitimize their national identity.25 Janet Davis' The Circus 
Age: Culture and Society under the American Big Top, similarly reveals how 
the physical sites of the circus upheld cultural values of individualism, feminine 
respectability, and Anglo-American superiority.26 Mart Stewart's "Rice, Water, 
and Power: Landscapes of Domination and Resistance in the Low-Country, 17901880,"
explains that when antebellum rice planters directed the transformation 
of tidewater swamps into a hydraulic grid of rice fields, they displayed not only 
their power over the environment, but simultaneously reinforced their control 
over African-American slaves. Although the landscape was a symbol of planters' 
domination, it also provided resources with which slaves could create their own 
livelihoods through gardening, fishing, and trading resources.27 These works 
identify some of the many ways in which culture is woven into our experiences 
of living in place, but they could go further to explain how individuals translate, 
comprehend, or transform the cultural meanings of particular places. If 
individuals interpret the cultural message of a particular site in a new way, does 
it alter the dominant power or meaning of that place? How do a multitude of 
understandings and experiences of a place come together to construct common 
cultural meaning? The process of how individuals attribute meaning to places 
deserves as much attention as the identification of particular cultural meanings 
in specific places. 
Donna Haraway provides another theoretical touchstone for works of 
environmental history and American studies. Haraway, like Foucault, exposes 
the cultural contingency and historical specificity of ostensibly universal 
knowledge. But she also believes that her scholarship should provide ways to 
better understand and engage in the world, and she remains unconvinced that 
Foucaultian analyses of power and incessant deconstructions of texts will suffice 
as guides for these practical aims.28 Haraway comes to balance her commitment 
to historic and cultural specificity and action through the doctrine of "situated 
knowledge." By asserting that all knowledge claims comes from spécifie 
positions, Haraway argues against knowledge that is "unbeatable" and unable 
 12 Kendra D. Smith 
to be called to account. Haraway maintains that to claim that all knowledge is 
"situated" is not to concede to relativism, because relativism claims "to be 
everywhere equally" whereas situated knowledge recognizes its partiality.29 
However, Haraway offers little explanation of the shared systems (nature, 
economy, culture) in which individuals create common identities, communities, 
and dreams. Although Haraway maintains that objectivity can only be realized 
through "the joining of partial views and halting voices into a collective subject 
position," she gives few indications of what common project might meld the 
partial views and situated knowledges together.30 
Haraway's call for situated knowledge stems primarily from her 
consideration of how gender shapes epistemology, but her term "situated 
knowledge" resonates with place-based and regionalist works in environmental 
history and American studies. Environmental historian Christopher Sellers' 
analysis of Henry David Thoreau, for example, notes that, "Thoreau's natural 
knowledge veiled neither its geographical ties to a particular place nor its 
dependence on individual perspective and experience; rather, his bodily 
situatedness facilitated his knowledge-making."31 American studies scholar 
Simon Bronner writes in Grasping Things: Folk Material Culture and Mass 
Society in America, "we grasp mind through behavior."32 Regionalist scholars 
claim that our thoughts and actions in place are not separate; rather, we come to 
think and believe through the things we do. 
American studies scholars have been among the leaders in documenting 
the effect of place on the production of knowledge and of region in the shaping 
of culture. The works of Paul Venable Turner and Thomas Schlereth, for instance, 
analyze the influence of physical sites that facilitate formal education, such as 
college campuses and arboretums.33 Other American studies scholars have 
documented regionalist influences in formal art and literature.34 The Handbook 
of American Folklore, edited by Richard Dorson, identifies how a variety of 
places—schools, neighborhoods, and office buildings—function as sites for 
interchange and exchange of rituals, customs, traditions, and sayings that make 
up a local culture.35 George Lipsitz argues that social activists of the 1960's 
sought to gain control over physical spaces, "using space as a source of solidarity 
and as impetus to action."36 By investigating the shared traditions, art forms, 
and environments of particular places, regionalists within the field of American 
studies have argued for a conception of collective identity (and collective 
memory) based on experiences in place and experiences of displacement.37 
Environmental writers have also called for more conscious engagement 
with the concept of place. Writers like David Orr and Paul Gruchow contend 
that knowing one's place also engenders a sense of belonging and responsibility, 
because it enables a person to understand one's dependence on the natural 
landscape and on other members of a shared community. But they note that as 
people have fewer opportunities to directly observe nature and to engage with 
one another, they know less and less about the natural and cultural history of the 
places they live.38 Orr and Gruchow find this trend unsettling, because as students 
 American Studies and Environmental History 13 
learn to depend on specialized expertise and abstract technological solutions to 
environmental problems, they have neither the skills nor interest to take care of 
their local land, water, and community. Therefore, the authors advocate active 
learning about place—through direct observation of nature and cultivation of 
community life. By changing how people come to know place, they believe that 
they can transform how they live in it.39 Like Haraway, these environmental 
writers recognize a necessary relationship between epistemology and ontology, 
but their emphasis on the power of place offers a site or common project through 
which many "situated knowledges" can interact with one another. 
Environmental historians employ the concept of place as a site for further 
historical inquiry. In a 1994 article titled "Place: An Argument for Bioregional 
History," historian Dan Flores calls for scholars to consider region as a unit of 
analysis in their narratives. He writes that bioregionalism's "emphasis on the 
close linkage between ecological locale and human culture, its implication that 
in a variety of ways humans not only alter environments but also adapt to 
them.. .ties it to some central questions of environmental history inquiry."40 Many 
of the most successful works in environmental history use a particular site or 
region to explain how changes in the land, new ways of producing and consuming 
nature, or evolving concepts of nature alter how people experience place.41 
Richard White's The Organic Machine, for instance, employs the history of one 
particular site—the Columbia River watershed—to survey shifting relationships 
between people and the river. His work deftly depicts the beliefs, hopes, and 
ideals through which people understood their work as fishermen and women, 
gilnetters, planners, nuclear plant workers, and fisheries managers.42 
Narrowing the scope of analysis to a particular region gives historians a 
refined lens to narrate the turning points in human-environment interactions. 
Moreover, by focusing on particular places, environmental historians have been 
able to identify the conflicting and cooperating interests in struggles over how 
natural and cultural resources of a region should be managed. By using the 
localized case study of Gary, Indiana, for instance, Andrew Hurley's 
Environmental Inequalities explains how white suburban housewives, labor 
union activists, and black political leaders alternatively built coalitions and broke 
them as they mediated the city's environmental politics.43 Pairing the skills of 
bioregional historians and folklorists might help to illuminate the collective 
knowledge and cultural conflicts that come out of particular human-environment 
interactions. 
Although emphasis on place lends important tools for American studies 
and environmental history scholars, there are risks to regionally-placed case 
studies of environmental and cultural change. Knowing particular places and 
cultures helps cultivate responsibility towards nature and cultures, but such 
responsibility also depends on the recognition of connections between places 
and peoples. In fact, trends of national incorporation, cultural hegemony, and 
global interdependence often spark the impulse towards regionalism.44 All 
localities are tied to other ones through systems of state, economy, culture, and 
 14 Kendra D. Smith 
environment. The practices of environmentalism and social justice must be 
carried out in particular places, but guidelines for action must come from both 
assessing local needs and environments in the context of a larger perspective. 
We are all at once both local and extra-local. Our bodies and minds are part of 
local communities, but they also constitute individuals and communities within 
a nation, nodes within a global world and beings within an ecosystem. Local 
studies provide us with concrete starting points for engaging and protecting 
culture and nature of place, but we must evaluate our individual and local actions 
precisely because of our responsibility and our larger ecological and cultural 
community. 
To focus widely and abstractly on systems of environmental change, cultural 
hegemony, or global capitalism diminishes the notion that individuals acting in 
place can make a difference. Abstract national and international agendas for 
environmental and social change often fail to be attentive to how such grand 
imperatives are carried out on a local level, and these agendas risk being 
irrelevant, arrogant, or even harmful to the knowledge and practices of local 
communities. As Louis Warren's The Hunter's Game explains, the transformation 
of local hunting commons into state and nationally-managed wild lands waged 
social costs, especially for the rural poor.45 But environmental and American 
studies based on a local scale tend either to ignore the relationship between 
local and global networks of power or to romanticize all local action as resistant 
without acknowledging tension among local groups or friction between 
localities.46 Many social and environmental problems transcend regional and 
national boundaries—issues like global warming, AIDS, and inequities in the 
distribution of natural resources and toxic wastes. Local practice is important, 
but a narrow, insular NIMBY-ism cannot suffice as a model for more equitable 
and humble relations to the natural world. 
Producing, Consuming, and Co-Producing Space and Place 
American studies scholars and environmental historians, then, must continue 
to find ways to illuminate the complex tensions and "intricate interdependences" 
between individual and community, person and environment, local and global.47 
Only theories that acknowledge the simultaneity and interplay between local 
and global or individual and community can provide an adequate framework 
for guiding appropriate local actions that can address large-scale environmental 
and social problems. What theories or existing histories might help engender 
such insights? Exemplars that seem to straddle these scales and provide 
imaginative models for future work include Henri Lefebvre's Production of 
Space, Victoria de Grazia's idea of "consumption regimes" and Anthony 
Bebbington's theory of "coproduction." 
Lefebvre asserts that all spaces are social products, not merely physical 
sites or mental representations. Building on this assertion, Lefebvre contends 
that through coming to know spaces, one also comes to understand and engender 
 American Studies and Environmental History 15 
social values and practices. In Lefebvre's terms, "If space is a product, knowledge 
of it must be expected to reproduce and expound the process of production."48 
Like Foucault, Lefebvre critiques the dominance of conceived spaces—abstract 
ways of describing space such as maps, city plans, or language—because these 
conceptions of space, generated through formal institutions and with scientific 
knowledge, disguise the power of the state and of capitalism.49 Like Haraway, 
Lefebvre values the knowledge generated through local and peripheral relations 
to particular spaces. He writes that lived spaces generate less formal, local forms 
of knowing that are geographically and historically contingent and are the result 
of specific spatial practices.50 Yet Lefebvre also recognizes that scales of space 
do not operate separately. As he contends, "The worldwide does not abolish the 
local."51 Whereas Haraway fails to resolve conflicts between multiple subject 
positions, Lefebvre acknowledges that lived space is the space of social 
struggle—where relations of dominance, subordination, and resistance are played 
out.52 However, Lefebvre's abstract scale obfuscates exactly how the processes 
of social struggle operate, and his emphasis on production and producers of 
space offers little explanation of how spaces are interpreted and consumed.53 
Geographer Anthony Bebbington provides a more concrete model of how 
people combine local practices and values within extra-local systems as they 
produce and consume material and ideal elements of space. In "Reencountering 
Development: Livelihood Transitions and Place Transformations in the Andes," 
Bebbington explains that in Colta, Ecuador, many rural migrants come to the 
city for jobs, but use their earnings to accumulate enough capital to buy lands 
and build houses in the rural areas.54 The migrants do not fit the pattern of the 
resistant peasant, because they willingly engage in wage labor, but neither do 
they fit the Western model of capital accumulation and modernization, because 
they choose to return to their rural homes. Bebbington concludes, "'Modernizing 
development' is not necessarily resisted but is more often taken, transformed, 
and used; and similarly, modernizing institutions are worked with, used, 
transformed, and turned, as far as possible, to people's own purposes. As a 
consequence, almost everything about development is 'coproduced.'"55 
Understanding development as "coproduction" puts individual people back into 
the narrative of capitalist development, and lessens tendencies of the economy 
to appear as a "black box" or totalizing force. It also has the potential to replace 
the idea of the romanticized resistant local for a more realistic portrayal of peoples 
who engage with larger structures and also assert their political and cultural 
identities. Bebbington's notion of co-production creates a place for individual 
agency and contextualizes this action within systems of ecology, economy, and 
culture. 
Recent works in the history of consumption, similarly, suggest a kind of coconsumption
because they embed stories of how individuals create identities 
through consumerism within frameworks of state power. Historian Victoria de 
Grazia notes that the significance of consumer practices to empower or 
disempower depends largely on the political system in which these actions take 
 16 Kendra D. Smith 
place. Different political systems, she argues, create and support varying 
"consumption regimes." She writes, "processes of forming identities through 
acts of consumption need to be related to definitions of the rights and obligations 
of citizenship under particular regimes of power."56 James J. Farrell's One Nation 
UnderGoodsand Lizabeth Cohen's A Consumer's Republic, give readers clear 
examples of ways in which the state and citizens channel consumer culture— 
from tax-increment financing to minimum wages, trademark laws to protective 
legislation.57 De Grazia's conception of "consumer regimes" provides a heuristic 
tool for comparative American studies, because it emphasizes that the influences 
of American capital and culture abroad are always affected by the structures 
and places of the nation. To call attention to the influence of state structures on 
consumption is not to deny the importance of identities forged through consumer 
practices, but rather to recognize the dialogue between cultural identities and 
the political economy and ecology of particular places. 
An emphasis on co-production and/or co-consumption in American studies 
and environmental history is not novel; existing works in American studies that 
have used similar ideas—such as bilingualism, hybridity, or heteroglossia—to 
describe the processes of adaptation of cultural forms.58 Environmental histories 
also lend evidence of intermediaries who moved ideas, practices, or materials 
between rural and urban or national and local places, adapting them to fit local 
contexts and purposes.59 My concern is not with the novelty of the idea of 
"coproduction," but rather with the implications that it presents for the ways 
environmental history and American studies incorporate human agency into their 
narratives. Paying attention to the role of bilingual mediators in cultural and 
economic exchanges adds faces to an often faceless history in which the looming 
forces of "capitalism," "state," or "power" seem to be the only compelling 
characters. When combined with stories of how intermediaries were at once 
coldly received, enthusiastically welcomed, and skeptically cooperated with by 
local communities, these histories begin to approximate the rich and complicated 
truths of what the processes of change and exchange might have looked like on 
a human scale. 
Engaging Histories and Histories That Engage 
Despite differences in theme, approach, or ethical commitments, American 
studies and environmental history share a basic and important similarity: 
practitioners in both fields want to put their knowledge to work in the world. 
American studies and environmental history scholars pursue knowledge, but 
they also search for ways to enrich the public good and seek ways to deepen 
respect for nature. These are not trivial pursuits, but essential to their disciplinary 
traditions.60 As James J. Farrell explains in, "What are American Studies For? 
Some Practical Perspectives," the best American studies, "involve theory, but 
theory applied . . . to bridging the past and the present, the text and its readers, 
the language and its meanings."61 Through American studies, he writes, students 
 American Studies and Environmental History 17 
gain tools—empathy, understanding, critical consciousness, thoughtfulness, and 
imagination—to apply to life's situations. Similarly, William Cronon's "The 
Uses of Environmental History" suggests that environmental histories have a 
purpose, a lasting usefulness in the world. He writes, "By telling parables that 
trace the often obscure connections between human history and ecological 
change, environmental history suggests where we ought to go looking if we 
wish to reflect on the ethical implications of our own lives."62 The disciplines of 
American studies and environmental history ask their practitioners to learn theory 
and praxis. Equipped with the tools of American studies and environmental 
history, students and scholars can act willfully, live mindfully, and behave 
selectively. Praxis pairs the ideal and material in a transformative way. 
Finding ways to better address human agency within the frameworks of 
economy, state, and culture, then, is not merely an intellectual task; it is imperative 
to helping American studies and environmental history fulfill their missions as 
disciplines committed to engaging theory and practice. The ways that 
environmental historians and American studies scholars tell their stories, and 
especially the roles they assign to humans in their narratives, have great 
implications for how readers put this thoughtful work to use in the world. When 
scholars tell top-down deterministic stories about environmental and cultural 
change in which "biology," "state," "cultural hegemony," or "capitalism" are 
the key actors, readers are left feeling that their actions matter little in the grand 
scale of world events. Readers may be left saddened by stories of extinctions or 
disturbed by the grasp of normalizing power, but cannot imagine how people 
could have acted in alternative ways. 
Localized histories of resistance, however, give readers the sense that they 
can only act by bucking "the system." Like Thoreau, they need to retreat from 
the village and build themselves a life in the woods. But most readers are deeply 
embedded within systems of culture, family, polity, environment, and economy, 
and these systems shape the possibilities for individual action within the world. 
Although a few readers might admire Thoreau, most readers say to the historian: 
"Get Real." They have children to feed, mortgages to pay, and do not feel that 
they can become the town crank. It's not that the readers don't care about nature 
or their communities; rather, many of the stories that historians and 
environmentalists tell them about human engagement in the natural world leave 
them with little hope that they can make a difference in the real places in which 
they live. Moreover, localized histories of resistance often leave unexplored the 
ramifying and unintended consequences that extend beyond the local context. 
For example, a history of local resistance to the construction of a waste incinerator 
might inspire students, but it may not explain the ecological and social 
consequences of its relocation to another neighborhood or address the systems 
of waste generation that made the incinerator necessary in the first place. 
Histories of co-production, I think, might help readers to bridge these 
alternatives, by showing them human exemplars who are real people who are 
 18 Kendra D. Smith 
neither shamelessly complicit in large-scale environmental and cultural changes, 
nor avowedly resistant to them. Co-production is also a great template for 
encouraging the active, engaged learning that American studies and 
environmental history can cultivate. At their best, the disciplines require students 
to consider their own lives within the larger contexts and institutions that shape 
systems of culture, economy, politics, law, ecology, family, race, gender, sexuality, 
and power. An American studies and environmental history education should 
provide students with the skills to employ and critique these structures effectively 
and critically. Within the co-production model, individuals are not passive 
receptors of these systems, destined to act as the systems decide, but neither do 
they act without awareness or recognition of the larger structures. Hence, coproduction
provides us a framework that might engender active and participatory 
American studies and environmental history.63 
While the ever-expanding body of works by American studies scholars and 
environmental historians of the last thirty years shows much sophistication and 
imagination, scholars of both fields must continue to consider the public contexts, 
readers, and students whom their works serve.64 In particular, American studies 
and environmental history could do more collective work to consider a question 
central to both fields: how do human agents act within larger cultural, economic, 
and ecological systems? Indeed, opportunities for complementary co-production 
and cooperation between American studies and environmental history abound. 
Although the institutional systems inhabited by individual scholars may 
discourage exchanges between practitioners of American studies and 
environmental history, as scholars, we too, can work with, transform, and turn 
these systems to our own purposes—a richer body of literature, renewed 
academic dialogue, and engaging scholarship in the classroom and the field. 
Notes 
The author wishes to thank the three anonymous reviewers whose comments were 
especially instructive in improving this essay and to thank the editors of American 
Studies for their assistance. She also wishes to recognize the colleagues who aided in 
its transformation from a seminar paper to its current form—Ikuko Asaka, Will Barnett, 
Jim Feldman, Sam Graber, Hong Jiang, Scott Moranda, Mike Rawson, Tom Robertson, 
Keith Woodhouse, and the University of Wisconsin Environmental History Colloquium. 
Most of all, she'd like to thank Jim Farrell and Frieda Knobloch for launching her 
journey into American studies and environmental history at St. Olaf College and to 
thank William Cronon for patiently and gracefully shepherding along her studies at 
University of Wisconsin-Madison. Each of these wonderful mentors provides a model 
of invigorating scholarship that reaches beyond the classroom. Any errors or oversights 
are the author's own. 
1. Hal Rothman, "Conceptualizing the Real: Environmental History and American Studies." 
American Quarterly 54 (September 2002): 456; see also Hal Rothman, "A Decade in the Saddle: 
Confessions of a Recalcitrant Editor," Environmental History 1 (January 2002), 9-21. 
2. For the public mission of American studies and environmental history, see Gene Wise, 
"Some Elementary Axioms for an American Culture Studies," in Prospects: An Annual of American 
Cultural Studies, 4, ed. Jack Salzman (New York: Burt Franklin and Company, 1979), 531. Wise 
asserts that, "Despite massive institutional pressures to see it otherwise, the first and final base of 
American culture studies must be not in the departments of academe, but in ongoing experiences 
outside." Many environmental historians, meanwhile, seek to reach public audiences and to inspire 
 American Studies and Environmental History 19 
them to reconsider their own relationship with the natural world. As Donald Worster states, 
"Environmental history ought to have a few ideas to offer the public, and those ideas ought to 
have a little conviction in them as well as reason and evidence. The historian should let people 
know what he cares about and encourage them to care about it too." Worster, The Wealth of 
Nature: Environmental History and the Ecological Imagination (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1993), vii-ix. 
3. Nicholas Bromell, "What Next? Thought and Action in Intellectual Work," American 
Quarterly 47 (March 1995): 105; James T. Kloppenberg, "Pragmatism: An Old Name for Some 
New Ways of Thinking?" Journal of American History %?> (June 1996): 101. 
4. Donald Worster, "Seeing Beyond Culture," Journal of American History 76 (March 
1990): 1144; Kevin Dann and Gregg Mitman, "Essay Review: Exploring the Borders of 
Environmental History and the History of Ecology." Journal of the History of Biology^ (Summer 
1997): 296. 
5. For examples of environmental history that diminish individual human experiences, 
for a larger scale on the species, see Alfred Crosby, Ecological Imperialism: The Biological 
Expansion of Europe, 900-1900(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986) or Jared Diamond, 
Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies (New York: W. W. Norton, 1997). For 
calls for cultural influences in environmental history, see William Cronon, "Modes of Prophecy 
and Production: Placing Nature in History," Journal of American History16 (March 1990): 
1129; Carolyn Merchant, "Gender and Environmental History," Journal of American History 16 
(March 1990): 1117-21; Carolyn Merchant, "Shades of Darkness: Race and Environmental 
History," Environmental History^ (July 2003): 380-394. On power, Jennifer Price, e-mail message 
to author, September 17, 2003. 
6. Henry Nash Smith identified social and material explanations as part of culture as early 
as 1956. Smith, "Can 'American Studies' Develop a Method?" American Quarterly 9 (Summer 
1957): 203-4. Barry Shank, "The Continuing Embarrassment of Culture: From the Culture Concept 
to Cultural Studies," American Studies 38 (Summer 1997): 97-99. Both Worster and Crosby 
found their first institutional homes in American studies departments—at Yale University and 
the University of Texas respectively. See Rothman, "Conceptualizing the Real," 485. 
7. Raymond Williams, "Ideas of Nature," in Problems in Materialism andCulture(London: 
Verso, 1980), 67; E.P. Thompson, Making of the English Working Class (London: V. Gollanez, 
1963); Thompson, Whigs and Hunters: The Origin of the Black Act(London: Allen Lane, 1975); 
Leo Marx, The Machine and the Garden: Technology and the Pastoral Ideal in America (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1964). Both Richard White and William Cronon reference Williams. 
White, "Discovering Nature in North America" Journal of American History 19 (December 1992): 
874; William Cronon, Uncommon Ground: Rethinking the Human Place in Nature (New York: 
W. W Norton, 1996), 25. E.P. Thompson's work informs Louis Warren, The Hunter's Game: 
Poachers and Conservationists in Twentieth-Century America (New Haven: Yale University Press, 
1997) and Karl Jacoby, Crimes against Nature: Squatters, Poachers, and Thieves and the Hidden 
History of American Conservation (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001). Environmental 
histories have also long traced the intellectual history of ideas of nature, wilderness, and ecology. 
See Roderick Nash, Wilderness and the American Mind, 3rd ed. (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1982); Donald Worster, Natures Economy: The Roots of Ecology (San Francisco: Sierra 
Club Books, 1977); Carolyn Merchant, The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology, and the Scientific 
Revolution (San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1983). 
8. In recent years, environmental history's new-found attention to environmental justice 
and gendered histories of the environment has begun to break down these boundaries. Among the 
works that deal with class, race, and gender vis-à-vis the environment are Andrew Hurley, 
Environmental Inequalities: Class, Race, and Industrial Pollution in Gary, Indiana, 1945-1980 
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 1995); Carolyn Merchant, Ecological Revolutions: 
Nature, Gender, and Science in New England(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 1989); 
Vera Norwood, Made from This Earth: American Women and Nature (Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina, 1993); Amy Green, "Two Women Naturalists and the Search for Autonomy: 
Anna Botsford Comstock and the Producer Ethic; Gene Stratton Porter and the Gospel of Wealth." 
Women's Studies Quarterly29 (Spring 2001): 145-154. 
9. Histories of nature as a resource and as a site for recreation dominated early 
environmental history scholarship, because so many of these histories traced the origins of 
Progressive-era conservation and preservation movements. See, for instance Samuel P. Hays, 
Conservation and the Gospel of Efficiency: The Progressive Conservation Movement, 18901920
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1959). Robert Gottlieb noted this trend in Forcing 
the Spring: The Transformation of the American Environmental Movement (Washington, DC: 
Island Press, 1993), 15-46. 
10. William Cronon, Nature's Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West (New York: Norton, 
1990); Richard Tucker, Insatiable Appetite: The United States and the Ecological Degradation 
of the Tropic World (Berkeley: University of California, 2000); Jennifer Price, Flight Maps: 
Adventures with Nature in Modern America (New York: Basic Books, 1999); Susan Strasser, 
 20 Kendra D. Smith 
Waste and Want: A Social History of Trash (New York: Metropolitan Books, 1999); Adam Rome, 
The Bulldozer in the Countryside: Suburban Sprawl and the Rise of American Environmentalism 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001). 
11. Richard White, "Are You an Environmentalist, or Do You Work for a Living?: Work 
and Nature" in Uncommon Ground: Rethinking the Human Place in Nature, William Cronon, 
ed. (New York: W. W. Norton, 1995), 181-2. 
12. Two works provide especially useful analyses of the history of material culture studies 
and the multiple disciplines represented in the field. They are: Thomas Schlereth, "Material Culture 
Studies in America, 1876-1976," in Material Culture Studies in America, compiled by Thomas 
Schlereth, (Nashville: American Association for State and Local History, 1982), 1-78 and Ann 
Smart Martin and J. Ritchie Garrison, "Shaping the Field: The Multidisciplinary Perspectives of 
Material Culture," in American Material Culture: The Shape of the Field. Ann Smart Martin and 
J. Ritchie Garrison, eds. (Winterthur: Winterthur Museum, 1993), 1-21. Cary Carson, "Material 
Culture History: The Scholarship Nobody Knows," in American Material Culture, 401-428 
identifies material culture as an off-shoot of American studies. See also E. McClung Fleming, 
"Artifact Study: A Proposed Model," Winterthur Portfolio9 (June 1974): 153-61; Kenneth Ames, 
"Meaning in Artifacts: Hall Furnishings in Victorian America." Journal of Interdisciplinary History 
9 (Summer 1978): 19-46; John Kouwenhoven, "American Studies: Words or Things?" in American 
Studies in Transition, Marshall Fishwick, ed. (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 
1964), 15-35; Thomas Schlereth, Cultural History and Material Culture (Ann Arbor: UMI Press, 
1990); Ian M.G. Quimby, ed. Material Culture and the Study of American Life. (New York: W. 
W. Norton, 1978); Ruth Schwarz Cowan, More Work for Mother: The Ironies of Household 
Technology from the Open Hearth to the Microwave. (New York: Basic Books, 1983); Ruth 
Schwarz Cowan, "The Consumption Junction: A Proposal of Research Strategies in the Sociology 
of Consumption," in Wiebe Bijker, Thomas P. Hughes, Trevor Pinch,eds. The Social Construction 
of Technological Systems: New Directions in the Sociology and History ofTechnology(Cambndge: 
MIT Press, 1987), 261-280. 
13. Mary Douglas and Baron Isherwood, The World of Goods (New York: Basic Books, 
1979), 59; Arjun Appadurai, ed. The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective. 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986). Chandra Mukerji, From Graven Images: Patterns 
of Modern Materialism. (New York: Columbia University Press, 1983); Grant McCracken, Culture 
and Consumption: New Approaches to the Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Activities 
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988); Daniel Miller, Material Culture and Mass 
Consumption (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1987). 
14. Philip Deloria, Playing Indian (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998), 120, 149. 
15. Lizabeth Cohen, Making a New Deal: Industrial Workers in Chicago, 1919-1939 
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1990); George Lipsitz, Rainbow at Midnight: Labor and 
Culture in the 1940s (Urbana: University of Illinois, 1994). Rural historians have also identified 
consumption as a key process in establishing rural identity. Hal S. Barron, Mixed Harvest: The 
Second Great Transformation in the Rural North, 1870-1930 (Chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina, 1997); Ronald Kline, Consumers in the Country: Technology and Social Change in 
Rural America (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2000). See also Peter K. Lunt and 
Sonia M. Livingstone, Mass Consumption and Personal Identity: Everyday Economic Experience 
(Buckingham, U.K.: Open University Press, 1992). 
16. Nayan Shah, Contagious Divides: Epidemics and Race in San Francisco's Chinatown 
(Berkeley: University of California, 2001), 158-9. 
17. George Sanchez, Becoming Mexican-American: Ethnicity, Culture, and Identity in 
Chicano Los Angeles, 1900-1945 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994), 201-205; Nan 
Enstad, Ladies of Labor, Girls of Adventure (New York: Columbia University Press, 1999). 
18. Price, Flight Maps. Also see Ann Smart Martin, "Makers, Buyers, and Users: 
Consumerism as A Material Culture Framework." Winterthur Portfolio. 28 (Summer/Autumn 
1993): 157. James J. Farrell also explores the interface between the environmental and cultural 
contexts of commodities in Farrell, One Nation Under Goods: Malls and the Seductions of 
American Shopping (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 2003). 
19. Frieda Knobloch, The Culture of Wilderness: Agriculture as Colonization in the 
American West (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 1996), 3. 
20. Deborah Fitzgerald, Every Farm a Factory: The Industrial Ideal in American Agriculture 
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 2003), 4, 8. 
21. Stephen Gudeman, Economics as Culture: Models and Metaphors of Livelihood 
(London: Routledge, 1986), 28, 35. 
22. This section of the paper has been aided immensely by Christopher Sellers, "Thoreau's 
Body: Towards an Embodied Environmental History," EnvironmentalHistory 4 (October 1999): 
486-514; and Akhil Gupta and James Ferguson, Culture Power Place: Explorations in Critical 
Anthropology (Durham: Duke University Press, 1997), 1-29. 
23. Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: the Birth of the Prison (New York: Random 
House, 1979); Idem., Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972-1977, 
 American Studies and Environmental History 21 
ed. Colin Gordon (New York: Pantheon, 1980); Foucault, The Order of Things: AD Archaeology 
of the Human Sciences (New York: Pantheon Books, 1973). 
24. For Foucault 's influence on environmental history, see Sellers, "Thoreau's Body," 488. 
For his influence on American studies, see George Lipsitz, "Listening to Learn and Learning to 
Listen: Popular Culture, Cultural Theory, and American Studies," American Quarterly 42 
(December 1990): 619. 
25. Marguerite Shaffer, See America First: Tourism and National Identity, 1880-1940 
(Washington, DC: Smithsonian, 2000), 3-6. 
26. Janet Davis, The Circus Age: Culture and Society under the American Big Top (Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina, 2002), 83, 210-11. 
27. Mart Stewart, "Rice, Water, and Power: Landscapes of Domination and Resistance in 
the Low-Country, 1790-1880," Environmental History Review 15 (Fall 1991): 48-49. 
28. Donna Haraway, "Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism as a Site of 
Discourse on the Privilege of Partial Perspective," Feminist Studies 14 (1988): 579. 
29. Haraway, "Situated Knowledges," 584. 
30. Ibid, 590. 
31. Sellars, "Thoreau's Body," 491. 
32. Simon Bronner, Grasping Things: Folk Material Culture and Mass Society (Louisville: 
University Press of Kentucky, 1986), 21. 
33. Paul Venable Turner, Campus: An American Planning Tradition 2nd ed. (Cambridge: 
MIT Press, 1987); Thomas Schlereth, "Keepers of Trees: A Cultural History of North American 
Arboretums and Arboreal Sites," Notre Dame University American Studies Department website, 
http://americanstudies.nd.edu/mainpage.html (Accessed September 15, 2003). 
34. For examples of literary and artistic regionalism in American Studies, see Carey Williams, 
The New Regionalism in American Literature (Seattle: University of Washington Bookstore, 
1930); Matthew Baigell, The American Scene: American Painting in the 1930s(New York: F.A. 
Praeger, 1974); American Studies Association: Eighth Biennial Convention, "Region in American 
Culture," (abstracts, Rivermont Hotel, Memphis, TN, October 29-November 1, 1982); Thomas 
Schlereth and Barbara Allen, eds, Sense of Place: American Regional Cultures (Louisville: 
University Press of Kentucky, 1990); Diane Dufva Quantic, The Nature of the Place: A Study of 
Great Plains Fiction (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1995); Elizabeth Ammons and 
Valerie Rohy, eds, American Local Color Writing, 1880-1920 (New York: Penguin, 1998); Lisa 
Botshon and Meredith Goldsmith, eds. Middlebrow Moderns: Popular American Women Writers 
of the 1920s (Boston: Northeastern University Press, 2003). 
35. Richard Dorson, ed., Handbook of 'American Folklore (Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1983), 86-87. 
36. George Lipsitz, "No Shining city on a Hill: American Studies and the Problem of Place," 
American Studies 40 (Summer 1999): 59. 
37. On displacement, see Gupta and Ferguson, eds., Culture Power Place, 118-135; 203232.
38. Paul Gruchow, Grass Roots: The Universe of Home (Minneapolis: Milkweed Editions, 
1995), 126, 130; David Orr, Ecological Literacy: Education and the Transition to a Postmodern 
World (Albany: State University of New York, 1992), 89, 130-31. 
39. Gruchow, Grass Roots, 124-5, 130; Orr, Ecological Literacy, 103. 
40. Dan Flores, "Place: An Argument for Bioregional History," Environmental History 
Review 18 (Winter 1994), 5. 
41. Richard White, The Organic Machine The Remaking of the Columbia River(New York: 
Hill and Wang, 1995); Donald Worster, Dust Bowl: The Southern Plains in the 1930's (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1979); Richard Judd, Common Lands, Common People: The 
Origins of Conservation in Northern New England'(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1997). 
42. White, The Organic Machine. 
43. Hurley, Environmental Inequalities. 
44. As Elizabeth Ammons and Valerie Rohy note, local turn-of the century writers addressed 
broader social issues such as immigration and national identity. Ammons and Rohy, American 
Local Color Writing, 1880-1920, xvii; Lipsitz, "No Shining City on a Hill," 59, 65. 
45. Warren, The Hunter s Game, 15-17; 181-2. 
46. For example, Adam Rome's Bulldozer in the Countryside explains that as suburbanites 
witnessed the detrimental environmental impact of their neighborhoods' construction, they became 
inspired to protect the environment. But Rome's analysis fails to consider the racial and class 
markers of suburban environments. Therefore, he prides local initiative without acknowledging 
the larger power structures in which these activists operated. Studies that emphasize how 
consumerism helped engender class and gendered identities, however, often fail to recognize the 
cumulative environmental impacts of increased consumerism. 
47. Janice Radway, "What's in a Name: Presidential Address to the American Studies 
Association, 20 November 1998," American Quarterly 51 (March 1999): 10. 
 22 Kendra D. Smith 
48. Henri Lefebvre, The Production of Space, Trans. Donald Nicholson Smith (Oxford: 
Blackwell Press, 1991), 26. 
49. Ibid., 37-38. 
50. Lynn Stewart, "Bodies, Visions, and Spatial Politics: A Review Essay on Henri Lefebvre's 
The Production of Space," Environment and Planning D: Society and Space. 13 (October 1995), 
610-611. 
51. Lefebvre, Production of Space, 86. 
52. Edward Soja, Thirdspace: Journeys to LA and Other Real-And-Imagined Places 
(Cambridge: Blackwell Press, 1996), 68-70. 
53. For more on the consumption of place, see John Urry, Consuming Places (London: 
Routledge, 1995). 
54. Anthony Bebbington, "Reencountering Development: Livelihood Transitions and Place 
Transformations in the Andes," Annals of the Association of American Geographers^ (September 
2000), 503-504. For a similar model, see Akhil Gupta, Postcolonial Developments: The Making 
of Modern Agriculture in India (Durham: Duke University Press, 1998). 
55. Ibid, 513-514. 
56. Victoria de Grazia, ed. with Ellen Furlough, The Sex of Things: Gender and Consumption 
in Historical Perspective (Berkeley: University of California, 1996), 279. 
57. Farrell, One Nation Under Goods, 215-232; Lizabeth Cohen, A Consumer's Republic: 
The Politics of Mass Consumption in Postwar America (New York: Knopf, 2003). 
58. For example, Elizabeth Fox-Genovese explains that feminist, African-American and 
Jewish writers expressed gendered, ethnic, racial, and religious identities in relation to the dominant 
groups. Elizabeth Fox-Genovese, "Between Individualism and Fragmentation: American Culture 
and the New Literary Studies of Race and Gender," American Quarterly 42 (March 1990): 12; 
On heteroglossia, see Mikhail Bakthin, The Dialogic Imagination. Michael Holquist and Caryl 
Emerson, eds. Michael Holquist, trans. (Austin: University of Texas, 1981); Terry Eagleton, ed. 
Literary Theory: An Introduction. 2nd ed. (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 1996), 99102.
59. Richard White, The Middle Ground: Indians, Empires, and Republics in the Great 
Lakes Region, 1650-1815 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991); One of the liveliest 
passages of William Cronon's Natures Metropolis, for instance, tells how the merchant John 
McDowell Burrows finessed trade in farmers' potatoes and frozen hogs as well as exchanges with 
dry goods wholesalers in the city. Cronon, Natures Metropolis, 319. 
60. For examples and analysis of the activist strain in American Studies, see Wise, "Some 
Elementary Axioms for an American Culture Studies," 531; Gene Wise, "Paradigm Dramas in 
American Studies: A Cultural and Institutional History of the Movement," American Quarterly 
31 (Fall 1979): 312, 327; Guenter Lenz, "American Studies and the Radical Tradition," Prospects 
12 (1987), 20-58. In environmental history, see Worster, Nature's Economy: The Roots of Ecology, 
Worster, Wealth of Nature, Carolyn Merchant, Radical Ecology: The Search for a Livable World 
(New York: Routledge, 1992). 
61. James J. Farrell, "What Are American Studies For? Some Practical Perspectives," 
American Studies 40 (Summer 1999): 195. 
62. William Cronon, "The Uses of Environmental History," Environmental History Review 
17 (Fall 1993): 20. 
63. Farrell, "What are American Studies For?" 195. 
64. For more on the expansion of environmental history scholarship, see Richard White, 
"Afterword: Environmental History: Watching a Historical Field Mature" Pacific Historical 
Review, 70 (February 2001): 110-111. 
