102 1993 Linear Parks Conference Proceedings Early Visions for a System of Connected Parks Daniel Joseph Nadenicek Introduction to the mid-1850s. It was an idea that was also connected Horace William Shaler Cleveland (1814- to important literary explorations by 1900), an early pioneer in the profession prominent American writers about the of landscape architecture, designed the landscape 4 and civilization. It is no Minneapolis Park System in the 1880s. The accident that the founders of the profession design consisted of a small urban park near were first writers before they became the center of the city that was connected landscape architects. Cleveland and his by parkways to a system of parks, lakes partner Robert Morris Copeland (1830- and natural environments That park system 74), were particularly influenced by the was initially laid out far beyond the edge thought and writing of the Transcen- of the existing city providing an armature dentalist leader, Ralph Waldo Emerson. around which the city would grow for the Those early landscape architects tested next 1 several decades. In laying out his Emerson's aesthetic principles in the real design in the 1880s. Cleveland prophetic- landscape in 1855 with the design of ally encouraged community leaders to look Sleepy Hollow Cemetery, Concord, Massa- forward a hundred years to when there chusetts. Sleepy Hollow was more than a would be an urban population of over a cemetery; it was designed as a park and million people and Minneapolis and St. was an integral part of a system of public Paul had grown together. The Twin Cities open space 5, a town-country continuum. Metropolitan Area did grow as Cleveland Copeland and Cleveland were also influ- predicted and the park system he designed enced by Emerson's "organic aesthetic," is today considered one of the best in the which in landscape art meant a close country.2 connection to the integrity of the found What was the origin of that idea for a landscape and a disdain for artificial system of urban parks? Historians often embellishment.6 have treated Frederick Law Olmsted's From the design of Sleepy Hollow Emerald Necklace design forward Cleveland and Copeland were for Boston as the prototypical connected system that later leaders in the evolutionary development influenced the work of a number of of the idea of connectingurban parks.7 The individuals includingCleveland. However, name Emerald Necklace, often associated Cleveland considered the idea of con- with the Boston Park System, is a mis- necting parks long before Olmsted began nomer in the sense that it is sometimes his Boston work in the late 1870s. In fact, presented as a metaphoric title befitting the seed of the idea was sown and began Olmsted's master stroke of creative genius. to germinate even prior to the design However, a careful reading of Zaitzevsky Central Park. The story of the development coupled with a comprehensive under- of the idea of a system of connected parks standing of the careers of Cleveland, is complex.3 The development of that Copeland, and Copeland's protege, Ernest concept—as is so often the case in Bowditch, reveals the true story of the history—was a result of an evolutionary Boston's System; it was an idea that began process, which can be traced at least back to evolve in the minds of community Marrying Beauty With Utility 103 leaders and designers as early as 1856.8 active farmers such as Cleveland and Copeland.12 Those individuals shared their A New Profession: Scientific Farming ideas in print—especially in such publi- and Literature to Physical Design cations as the Afew EnglandFarmei. When The development of the idea of connected in 1854 Copeland and Cleveland formed parks cannot be separated from the a partnership to provide services in development of the profession of landscape landscape and ornamental gardening and architecture in the United States by the agricultural engineering (they included mid-nineteenth century. Cleveland and scientific farming services along with Copeland were both scientific farmers and design services), they relied on their writers before they began their career as literary and scientific farming connections landscape designers.9 Cleveland was a to gain work. In 1854 Simon Brown, the scientific fanner in New Jersey beginning editor of the New England Farmer and in the early 1840s. and Copeland followed Concord resident, enlisted Copeland's suite in Massachusetts about ten years later. advice for the design of the State Farm at Scientific farmers were concerned with the Westborough, 13 Massachusetts. In 1855 practical and the utilitarian, but they were Copeland participated in the Concord also interested 10 in aesthetics. Lyceum Series, organized by Brown and They believed that their experiments Emerson. He delivered an address about and writing on the subject would work to art, architecture, and landscape gardening elevate the American farmer (and therefore entitled "The Useful and the Beautiful." a significant percentage of the American In the same year the Concord, Massa- populace) physically, mentally and morally. chusetts Cemetery Committee, which Copeland was so convinced of the im- included Emerson as a member, retained portance of this task that he wrote an eight the services of Copeland and Cleveland hundred page guide on agriculture and to design Sleepy Hollow Cemetery. Sleepy landscape gardening titled Country Life. Hollow Cemetery is the final resting place Copeland began that book with the follow- of Emerson, Nathaniel Hawthorne and ing words: Henry David Thoreau, but it is also a built To all lovers of nature and to all reflection of a number of Emerson's engaged in cultivating and adorning the aesthetic ideas. Cleveland and Copeland earth, this book is dedicated, with the not only had a personal and professional earnest hope that it may attract to the relationship with the Transcendental practice of the arts of culture some who leader, they also studied his work and were will see that the pursuit is full of pleasure, influenced by many of his ideas.14 .. . and also with the hope that some who now earn their Emerson's Vision and Influence bread with the sweat of their brow,. . . will learn that within the round Emerson influenced the future work of of their daily duties they have every thing Copeland and Cleveland in two ways. First which can expand the mind and ennoble his writing about aesthetics guided their the soul.11 practice throughout their entire careers. By the 1850s agricultural and horti- Second, Emerson's vision of civilization cultural experimentation and writing about and urban life directly influenced their real the affective potential of the landscape was experiments in urban design. In his writing a common pursuit of many well-to-do New Emerson promoted an organic aesthetic for Englanders, professional writers, and all of the arts. He believed that art should 104 1993 Linear Parks Conference Proceedings be true to that which is found in nature of Concord was at first related to the need and he had a strong disgust for artificial for more burial space. The office of the embellishment. He also believed that the Superintendent of Public Grounds was development of details of any work must organized in the late 1840s to address that be accomplished "so that the whole and other needs of the community and presents a union of [the] integrated parts."15 Emerson's friend John Keyes filled that The idea of being true to place and position for the first several years. It was connecting the parts to the whole was a as a result of recommendations from driving impetus in all of the work of Keyes, Emerson, and others that the town Copeland and Cleveland. acquired the plot known as Sleepy Hollow Emerson also wrote a great deal about in the early 1850s. The site had been known a particular vision of civilization and urban as Sleepy Hollow for more than twenty life. Though urban experience was often years and it is likely that it was given that in direct opposition to any natural experi- name because it reminded citizens of ence, Emerson believed—unlike his Irving's picturesque descriptions of its New Romantic counterparts in Europe—that York namesake in the "Legend of Sleepy some reconciliation of those two worlds Hollow." On September 29,1855 Emerson was not only possible, it was necessary delivered his "Address to the Inhabitants for the future of American civilization. As of Concord at the Consecration of Sleepy Michael Cowan, a leading scholar on Hollow" in which he explained the design, Emerson's urban theories has written: the design intent, and the aesthetic vision First, he [Emerson] wished to see the for the cemetery. physical city become more creatively Sleepy Hollow was designed in keep- related to its natural hinterland and more ing with Emerson's organic aesthetic. It internally "natural" or "organic." Second, was gracefully fit into a natural amphi- he wanted to find ways by which the poet theater and a number of native species were [artist, even artist in the landscape] might planted in the landscape. As if in answer integrate the growing industrial city into to Emerson's calling the designers sought an artistic work that professed to embody to be true to the place. In that landscape organic principles.16 those that visited the graves of friends and Nature, believed Emerson, if carefully relatives could be sure that indeed even planned for in the design of cities could human beings are part of the "vast circula- stimulate the spiritual and oral develop 17m - tions of nature." In addition to its obvious ment of human beings and augment the function as a final resting place, the creative role of civilization. cemetery was also meant to serve the Emerson worked with these ideas in a Concord community as a public park, direct and straight forward way in his home where citizens might come together for community of Concord, Massachusetts. He games civic functions and education.18, , was always able to balance the dual roles "The acquisition and design of Sleepy of distant sage and practical community Hollow represents forward thinking in leader. From the 1830s forward, he made another way . . . the community leaders himself available to the affairs of Concord. [including Emerson] perhaps in consulta- One of his important contributionswas his tion with Copeland and Cleveland, began service on various committees concerned thinking about a system of public open with the public grounds of the community. space that extended from the heart of the The concern for the larger landscape community to Sleepy Hollow and beyond."19 Marrying Beauty With Utility 105 Sleepy Hollow, said Emerson, "fortunately periphery. It was with that purpose in lies adjoining to the Agricultural Society's mind—perhaps following the suggestions ground, to the New Burial Ground, to the of Copeland and Cleveland—that the Court House and Town House, making committee wrote: together a large block of public ground, permanen property f d It is believed that an ornamental avenuet o town an country— of this character, . . . with stately all the ornaments of either adding so much 20 dwelling-houses upon each side, con-value to all." As early as 1855, inspired necting the public parks in the centre by Emerson, Copeland and Cleveland of a busy city with attractive and quiet, considered the possibility of connecting although populous country in the one neighborhood, is a thing not possible community, Concord, with their interpretation of the natural environment of construction elsewhere in the world; on the fringe and those places where some thing of. the same kind already exists have been The Truth About Boston rendered famous in the consequence. 23 In truth the design for a system of connec- The filling of the back bay made Emerson's ted parks for Boston began at about the vision of the city possible for Boston. As same time as Sleepy Hollow. In 1856 early as the 1850s, a number of individuals Copeland and Cleveland offered sug- including Copeland and Cleveland, were gestions for the design of Commonwealth in the process of contemplating the Avenue in Boston. As Boston's back bay physical possibilities of that idea. Even was being filled, a number of individuals prior to the beginning of the Civil War the became concerned with the planning and concept of a connected park system for the dispersal of lots on that plot of land. the greater Boston area was in the early Under the Commonwealth of Massa- stages of its evolutionary development. chusetts Resolves of 1856 a committee, Emerson's Aesthetic vision as translated comprised of members of the state house by Copeland and Cleveland and the actual and senate and local commissioners, was filling of the back bay contributed to that organized to deal with issues related to possibility. the new lands. It was to this committee The development of that idea like that Copeland and Cleveland offered their much in American civilization was waylaid suggestions for the design of Common- by the Civil War. However, soon after the wealth 21 Avenue. Copeland and Cleveland end of the war those issues were again advised the committee that the width of revisited. Copeland and Cleveland contin- the proposed avenue should be increased ued to refine their thinking during the late from 170 to 240 feet allowing for a large 1860s. It is clear that by 1868 the idea of middle portion that might be planted with a system of connected parks had reached rows of trees and used for the recreational a higher level of sophistication in the minds enjoyment of citizens which "would be of designers and community leaders alike. ample for walks and seats secure from the Copeland had studied the idea in con- interference 22 of carriages." The avenue siderable depth. The pivotal year in the from the beginning of Copeland and history of the evolution of urban park Cleveland's involvement was viewed as a systems appears to be 1869. In "The Public parkway (or boulevard) that might connect Grounds of Chicago: How to Give Them the Common and Public Garden in Boston Character and Expression," written in that with other areas for recreation on the year, Horace Cleveland considered future 106 1993 Linear Parks Conference Proceedings parks for a number of cities with special Copeland's death in 1874. emphasis on Boston and Chicago. Cleve- It was also during early 1870s that land wrote "If Boston attempts a park Copeland employed a young engineer comprising any attractions of natural named Ernest W. Bowditch. Bowditch was scenery, she must go beyond her own educated in engineering at MIT. For a time limits."24 Also in 1869 Copeland wrote an he worked for the office of Shed and article for the Boston Daily Advertiser in Sawyer, Engineers. Copeland hired the which he outlined his scheme for a services of that office on many occasions municipal and metropolitan park system during the 1870s, since they were located of great magnitude. By 1872 he had in the same building as Copeland. Cope- distilled and fine tuned his thinking to the land worked directly with the young Shedd point that he was able to publish a pamphlet and Sawyer apprentice, Ernest Bowditch, entitled "The Most Beautiful City in on a number of projects. When Copeland America: Essay and Plan for the Improve- felt that he was being over charged by ment of the City of Boston." In that tract Shedd and Sawyer, he persuaded Bowditch Copeland argued that Boston needed a to split off from that office and set up an number of smaller parks and public open office of his own. Copeland offered spaces rather than a large central park such Bowditch a considerable amount of work as in New York. Though Copeland's as an incentive for that change. Bowditch, scheme was far from perfect, he did at the time in his early twenties, was more considered a number of areas—such as the than willing to take the plunge. Imme- Fens and part of West Roxbury—which diately, Copeland and Bowditch began to ultimately become part of the final plan cultivate a close working relationship that for the Boston system. functioned much like a loose partnership. Just as Central Park was preceded by It was during that period (from 1872 to an extensive editorial campaign, a con- 1874) that Bowditch was introduced to nected park system for Boston was pro- Copeland's scheme (which Copeland was moted in editorials for years before it continuing to refine) for a connected park became a physical reality. Many of the system for Boston. In March of 1874 editorials related to that idea in the early Copeland died unexpectedly. The follow- 1870s were written by Copeland. Of ing excerpt from Copeland's obituary, course, it did not hurt that his brother-in- probably written by Dunbar, reveals that law, Charles F. Dunbar, was the editor of the idea of a park system was foremost in the Boston Daily Advertiser during the his mind at the time of his death. "He had 1870s. Copeland used that newspaper as a done much in the way of laying out and soapbox from which to expound on the ornamenting private grounds, but his benefits of such a system for the citizens ambition was for work on a grander of Boston. In one of those articles Cope- scale."26 land spoke of a parkway that would thread Bowditch seized what he perceived its way through parks "of several places to be a great opportunity and purchased instead of one, the selection to be in Copeland's practice in landscape archi- different parts of the future and present tecture. He formed a partnership with city."25 The idea of a park system for Copeland's brother Franklin, believing that Boston was developed and heavily the Copeland name would bring him promoted by Copeland and others in business and add credibility to his practice. newspaper editorials and articles prior to On June 24, 1874 Bowditch published an Marrying Beauty With Utility 107 article and plan for a Boston park system for example, presented the concept in a in the Advertiser. Since Copeland was letter to Olmsted already in 1869 asking known to have been working on the scheme him 30 to comment. Cleveland worked for at the time of his death and because Olmsted on Prospect Park before he Bowditch was a twenty-four year old headed west in 1869 and no doubt the two engineer with little experience in landscape men conversed about the concept. Cleve- architecture, it is likely that Bowditch in land once in Chicago immediately set out the article was really presenting Copeland's to test the idea in built environments in work (with perhaps only minor changes). the Midwest. He had probably waited for an adequate Prior to 1870 he laid out the com- amount of time to pass after Copeland's death munity of Highland Park, Illinois where before 27 presenting that work to the public. he designed a parkway leading from the But Bowditch was a quick study and heart of the community out to a natural proved to be a capable student of landscape ravine area near the edge. The 1870s was design. He continued to refine and improve a difficult period for Cleveland's practice. the scheme which he had inherited. In 1875 His office burned in the "Great Chicago Bowditch published another pamphlet for Fire" of 1871 and he suffered a loss of public consumption titled "Rural Parks for business as a result of the financial panic Boston."28 That publication included a plan of 31 1873. that showed a remarkable similarity to the The idea of organization new cities park system plan presented to the public around a connected park system was by the Boston Park Commission in 1876. ultimately put into place by Cleveland in Omaha and Minneapolis. Cleveland began The Idea Taken West promoting the general concept for the It is clear that in 1876 Olmsted had only a Minneapolis system already in the 1870s, sketchy understanding of the entire system but it was not until the 1880s when the at 29 best. He had only been tangentially milling town appeared to be destined for connected to the development of the idea unharnessed growth that Cleveland was for Boston. On the other hand, in fairness, finally given his chance. The Minneapolis it must be said that during the same years Connected Park System was the crowning Olmsted was considering similar ideas for achievement of Cleveland's long career other cities such as Buffalo. But that work and it provided the armature around which should be seen only as part of the overall the city would grow for the next several evolutionary process. In fact, all of the decades. There he was able to take ideas early landscape architects discussed in this that he began to glean from Emerson as paper communicated with one another early as the 1850s and apply them in a about the idea on a regular basis. Copeland, new and burgeoning western city. 108 1993 Linear Parks Conference Proceedings ACKNOWLEDGMENT 11. R. Morris Copeland, Country Life: A Handbook This research was funded in part by a grant from of Agriculture, Horticulture, and Landscape the Institute for the Arts and Humanistic Studies, Gardening. Boston: John P. Jewett and Com- Penn State. pany, 1859, p. ii. OTES 12. Included among the writers who were interestedN in this realm was Ralph Waldo Emerson who 1. H. W. S. Cleveland, Suggestions fo System raised pears and studied the natural environment r a of Parks and Parkways for he City and even his own garden. t of Minne- apolis. Minneapolis: Johnson Smith & Harrison 13. Simon Brown Journals at the Concord Anti- , , 1883 pp 3-15 quarian Museum, Concord, MA., . . 2 Lance M Neckar Fast-Tracking Culture and 14. Emerson knew Copeland well enough that he. . , Landscape, An Unpublished Paper Minne was willing to serve as a character witness for . - apolis: University of Minnesota 1990 pp him in the 1860s. Cleveland wrote of Emerson , , . 17-18 in letters to friends and "The Aesthetic Develop-. 3. Th ment of the United Cities of St. Paul ande story is even more complex if one factors i be f development i Europ lated Minneapolis." I have recently had an articlen a num r o s n e re h ide f ing iou publi pe accepted for publication in the Emerson Societyto t e a o connect var s c o n pace i ba ironments Though Ameri Papers about Emerson's aesthetic influence ons s n ur n env . - influenced by development i h Cleveland.cans were s n suc places as Vienna and Paris the discussion of 15. Vivian C. Hopkins, Spires of Form: A Study of , that work is beyond the scope of this paper Emerson's Aesthetic Theory. Cambridge:. 4. I first became interested Harvard University Press, 1951, pp. 66- 80. in the significance of literary ideas to the early 16. Cowan, City of the West, p. 183. development of landscape architecture while writing my MLA 17. Ralph Waldo Emerson, "Address to the Inhabi- thesis at the University of Minnesota which was tants of Concord at the Consecration of Sleepy ultimately titled The Literary Landscape of Hollow," Emerson Papers. Cambridge: Hough- Horace Cleveland. Also see Daniel Joseph ton Library, Harvard University, Sept., 1855. Nadenicek, "Nature in the City: Horace Cleve- land' Aesthetic forthcoming i pecial issu 18. Ibid., part of the educational experience wass " n a s e f dscap d ba lanning connected to an arboretum planted in theo Lan e an Ur n P . cemetery. 5. See Daniel Joseph Nadenicek, "Sleepy Hollow 19. Nadenicek, "Sleepy Hollow Cemetery." Cemetery: Transcendental Garden and Com- munity Park, forthcoming in The Journal of 20. Emerson, "Consecration Address." " the New England Garden History Society. 21. Walter Muir Whitehall, Boston: A Topographic 6. Michael H. Cowan, City of the West: Emerson, History. Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard America, and Urban Metaphor. New Haven CT: University Press, 1968, p. 151. Also working , Yale University Press 1967 pp 184-85 on the scheme was the architect Arthur Oilman. , , . . That information can also be found in "Report 7. This is true except for that small interlude in of the Committee Appointed Under the Resolves American History commonly known as the Civil of 1856," Ch. 76, in Relation to Lands in the War. Back Bay with Accompanying Documents. 8. Cynthia Zaitzevsky, of course, wrote Frederick 22. "Resolves," p. 14. Law Olmsted and the Boston Park System. The purpose of this article is not to diminish the 23. "Resolves," pp. 14-15. accomplishments of Olmsted, his work in the 24. H. W. S. Cleveland, The Public Grounds of Fens for example will always stand as preeminent Chicago: How To Give Them Character and achievement in design. But the idea of a Expression. Chicago: Charles D. Lakey, Pub- connected system for Boston must be seen as it lisher, 1869, p. 8. is, the result an evolutionary process. 25. News article in the Boston Daily Advertiser 9. Obviously the same is true of Olmsted. In fact dated October 24, 1873. Though the article was at the time that Cleveland and Copeland began unsigned, it was almost certainly written by their practice Olmsted was still engaging in Copeland. Zaitzevsky comes to that conclusion scientific farming experiments at his home on as well. Staten Island. 26.Copeland's obituary in the March 30, 1874, 10. Nadenicek, "Cleveland's Aesthetic." Boston Daily Advertiser. Marrying Beauty With Utility 109 27. Cynthia Zaitzevsky, Frederick Law Olmstedand hometown of Lancaster, Massachusetts, in 1873. the Boston Park System. Cambridge: The The design of that cemetery should be seen as a Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, model for Cleveland's concept of urban growth 1982, p. 41. and connected environments. The cemetery was 28 Reminiscences of Ernest W Bowditch, The laid out like a city with a dense area of stones. " . " Essex Institute and ornamental plantings at the center. From 29 bid. p 43 there the density of grave sites decreased. I , . . dramatically as they moved out toward the edge 30. Ibid., p. 36. of the forty acre site. Cleveland also designed 3I.Cleveland continued to refine the idea of three distinct groves in which those scattered connected public spaces despite that downturn graves were set. The groves were in keeping . He worked with the idea in the design of a with the integrity of the native landscape. The number of romantic suburbs and he modeled dense urban core was connected to the natural " " the concept in the design of a cemetery in his groves by a long tree-lined avenue or parkway.