Narratives of Exploration, Sea Fiction, 
Mariners9 Chronicles, and the Rise of 
American Nationalism: "To Cast Anchor on 
that Point Where All Meridians Terminate" 
William E. Lenz 
One common tracing of the route to American nationalism follows a path 
from colonial self-governance and self-sufficiency, to an emerging political 
consciousness forged in the Revolution, to a sense of rhetorical self-creation, and 
to the expansion of geographical boundaries fueled by the doctrine of Manifest 
Destiny. I would like to suggest that several additional contributions to the 
development of a national identity were made by the popularity and dissemina­
tion of narratives of exploration and adventure, of American sea fiction and of 
mariners' chronicles. In each can be seen a self-posturing that reflected current 
patriotic attitudes and also helped to shape new attitudes toward nationality and 
self-definition. They also offered many Americans a realizable if visionary goal 
with which to confirm their entrance into the international community: the 
discovery of the Antarctic continent. 
Narratives of exploration were enormously popular in early nineteenthcentury
America. As William H. Goetzmann concludes, exploration narratives 
"fascinated an astonishing variety of Americans."1 Many Americans could not 
read enough in the genre of exploration, travel and adventure: the publication of 
foreign works in American editions, such as Jean Francois de Galaup La 
Perouse's A Voyage Round the World in the Years 1785,1786,1787,1788..., 
(Boston, 1801); of narratives of American exploration and exploitation, such as 
Captain Cleveland's Voyage from China to the Northwest Coast of America in 
1799, (New York, 1827); and of the countless literary reviews of narratives of all 
types in American periodicals all testify to the genre's popularity. An incomplete 
0026-3079/91/32G2-041$1.50/0 41 
 sample of American periodicals regularly reviewing narratives of exploration 
would include the North American Review, the American Journal of Science, the 
American Quarterly Review, the Knickerbocker, Graham's Lady's and 
Gentleman's Magazine, the Boston Miscellany of Literature and Fashion, the 
Western Literary Review, the United States Magazine and Democratic Review 
and the Ladies' Companion, and Literary Expositor. Following the common 
practice of the day, they usually printed extensive extracts from each work and 
often contained speculative articles on past, present or future exploration. 
A catalogue of exploration narratives available to the American public 
between 1815 and 1830, as revealed by their appearance in just two periodicals, 
the North American Review (Boston) and the American Journal of Science (New 
Haven), would number in excess of fifty—not counting those accounts of 
American continental exploration (such as those of Sarah Kemble Knight, Lewis 
and Clark, Timothy Flint, Anne Newport Royall, Timothy Dwight and Henry 
Schoolcraft).2 A writer in the North American Review commented as early as 
1815 that Americans were awash in exploration narratives. There had already 
been "so many expeditions by different nations, so many scientifick voyages, and 
such copious accounts published of the islands and coasts of the Pacifick Ocean"; 
nevertheless, he continued, we "open every new description of them with 
avidity."3 What is surprising is that American interest in continental exploration, 
an accepted fact of the period following the Louisiana Purchase, rides side by side 
with American interest in international exploration. The reader of the North 
American Review in 1815-1816 encountered articles discussing David Porter's 
Journal of a Cruise Made to the Pacifick Ocean and the recently reprinted A 
Journal of Travels from New Hampshire to Caratuck; one on the Sketch of the 
United States of North America . . .from 1600 to 1810; with Statistical Tables, 
and a New Map; one reviewing the discovery and conquest of Peru; a letter 
exploring the extent of Russian settlements in North America; an article on the 
Sandwich Islands; a review of a new book on Cincinnati; the Historical Memoir 
of the War of 1812 in West Florida and Louisiana in 1814-1815; reviews of 
statistical studies of Maine and the commerce of theUnited States; and a laudatory 
review of A Vocabulary, or Collection of Words and Phrases which Have Been 
Supposed to be Peculiar to the United States. Accounts of travel and exploration 
ministered to readers' desires to learn more about their own continent and about 
the larger world as an imaginative extension of the United States. Henry David 
Thoreau bears witness to this vision in ajournai entry: "The whole world is an 
America, a New World."4 
To their nineteenth-century American readers, exploration narratives were 
educative, escapist, exotic and addictive. Focusing on the authors of narratives, 
William C. Spengemann argues that 
the travel-writer begins to regard the act of composition, not 
simply as a report of travel completed and of conclusions 
arrived at prior to the writing itself, but as a particularly 
42 
 revealing form of travel in its own right; an especially com­
pressed and intensified form of experience, with an unusual 
capacity both for causing cognitive motions in the mind and for 
revealing the direction and significance of those motions.5 
For the reader as well, exploration narratives provided an immediate and intense 
experience of adventure. A writer in the American Journal of Science asserted 
in 1829 that "weareanation of travellers," a claim that gains force if werecognize 
that Americans often explored new territories—and new areas of themselves— 
through the act of reading.6 
Knowledge of the foreign could be acquired and possessed by reading first­
hand accounts, the narratives themselves, and, in a crucial secondary fashion, by 
reading the numerous reviews of narratives in periodicals. As they stimulated and 
satisfied the desire for knowledge, narratives, reviews and speculative essays also 
generated feelings of nationalism. Robert V.Bruce demonstrates that during the 
antebellum period increasing numbers of Americans developed a strong popular 
faith in science, the result of which was a concomitant spirit of progressive 
nationalism. "Science appealed to the public's yearnings for national prestige, 
cultural betterment, tales of wonder, and philosophical light"7 A writer in die 
Port Folio in 1813 noted that "the glorious achievements of our navy" in the War 
of 1812 had "kindled a new and holy spirit of nationality, and enabled the 
humblest citizen among us boldly to say to the world that he too has a country."8 
Abby Jane Morrell, wife of the successful Captain Benjamin Morrell, confirms 
this popular sentiment repeatedly in her account of a voyage with her husband: 
"To me the most cheerful sight [in foreign ports] was that of the American 
flag I rejoiced that this flag had not only been consecrated by bravery, but 
commemorated by the muse "* While mythologizing their national successes, 
perceptive Americans recognized the reality of their inadequate navy; as George 
T. Davis writes, in 1816 Congress authorized an eight-year, $1,000,000 naval 
rebuilding program.10 William H. Goetzmann concludes that the establishment 
and maintenance of a Pacific Squadron in the 1820s by the United States Navy 
illustrated a new sense of nationalism and a new economic imperative.11 And 
Thomas Philbrick has determined that between 1816 and 1842 the entire Ameri­
can fleet more than doubled in size, an expansion culminating in the public 
launching in 1837 of the 120 gun Pennsylvania.12 
The American imagination extended a nationalistic perception of the conti­
nent as a particularly American province to one of the globe, especially its 
uncharted seas and lands, as open to American exploitation and influence. 
Patriotism resulted directly from exploration, while exploration became a direct 
expression of patriotic feeling. It confirmed that the United States had come of 
age and would actively participate in the global search for knowledge. A review 
of John Franklin's Narrative of a Second Expedition to the Shores of the Polar 
Sea... in theAmerican Quarterly Review in 1828 stretched the limits of American 
involvement: "We are indeed well convinced that the survey of the shores of the 
43 
 Polar Sea, is very important in a commercial and national point of view.... Every 
thing which enlarges the boundaries of science, confers in the end some ben­
efit."13 Exploration contributed to national success and to a nationalistic belief 
in optimism and progressivism. 
In addition, exploration narratives confirmed the national values of indi­
vidual industry and personal sharpness. The financially successful voyages of 
American captains such as Richard J. Cleveland, Edmund Fanning, Nathaniel 
Palmer and Benjamin Morrell in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries 
proved the correctness of American attitudes: Cleveland's 1799 voyage to China 
realized a profit of $60,000, while Fanning's first captaincy of the Betsey earned 
'The Betsey Returning to Port." From Voyages Round the Worldby Edmund 
Fanning (1833). Courtesy of Peabody Museum of Salem. 
more than $50,000 for her owners and a smart $ 15,000 for himself. Motivated "by 
the thirst for national honor or personal glory," as Percy G. Adams reasons, these 
successes were at once individual and national.14 As explorers' narratives were 
published and read, and as review articles disseminated extracts to a wider 
audience, the accomplishments of individuals were made, as it were, public 
property, and thus allowed the reader to perceive abstract national values made 
tangible and personally realizable. The American reader could share in each 
explorer's personal success and could view it as a public demonstration of 
national success. Wayne Franklin's assessment of the effect of seventeenth- and 
eighteenth-century "explorer's language" is surely applicable to that of the 
nineteenth: "it becomes the foundation for a centralizing and optimistic structure 
44 
 in American historiography and American thought"; "each separate plot [be­
comes] a part of one grand action, all of them converging in the 'plat' of 
nationhood"15 Individuals could take pride in the acts of American explorers and 
entrepreneurs, celebrating national virtues as they identified with each American 
captain's success. In the minds of many Americans, the lofty aims of exploration 
were linked to the earthly goals of commerce, both successes contributing to a 
stronger sense of national selfhood. 
In the early nineteenth century, American readers of these narratives charac­
teristically viewed commercial voyages as voyages of exploration, and voyages 
of exploration as surveys for commerce. Without a separate scientific corps like 
the British or the French, most Americans viewed these as interdependent 
Linking these motives, typical accounts such as Benjamin Morrell's Narrative of 
Four Voyages to the South Seas and Pacific Oceans (1832), Edmund Fanning's 
Voyages Round the World (1833), and Abby Jane MorrelPs Narrative of a 
Voyage (1833) functioned as transitional works in a era still suspicious of fiction 
yet hungry for wonders. Fanning made explicit his motives. He cherished "the 
hope of being able to add some new discoveries to the knowledge already in the 
possession of man... and the no less flattering hope of realizing a fortune "16 
In addition, he took great patriotic pleasure in relating Captain Benjamin 
Pendleton's encounter with the Russian explorer Bellinghausen off the South 
Shetland Islands; when offered assistance and information on what would prove 
to be the Antarctic continent by these American sealers, the Russians, who had 
thought they had made new discoveries, gallantly admitted, "we must surrender 
the palm to you Americans."17 
Abby Jane Morrell complained that "it is surprising that commerce and 
letters have been so long divorced Letters have at all times been the necessary 
consequence of commercial enterprise... ,"18 Re-marrying them herself, she 
enacted what has by now become a familiar ceremony as she reflected on the 
future: "Some civilized nations must in time be masters of these remote islands, 
and it would be well for us to have a share in the influence that may be exercised 
in this new world abounding in articles of commerce."19 In order to insure that 
Americans will share in the bounty of this "new world," "individual enterprise, 
assisted by government," should mount exploring expeditions; it clearly follows 
that "their success must of course be a national benefit." In addition to "the 
advantage to our commercial people" of increased trade, she too sounded a 
nationalistic note. "It were well, too, that we should do something for the world 
whose commerce we enjoy; we have now a name to support, and what have we 
done to raise its glory?"20 
Benjamin Morrell's Narrative is suffused with commercial, visionary and 
patriotic attitudes. As a work ghost-written by Samuel Woodworth—journalist, 
playwright, and author of "The Old Oaken Bucket"—Morrell's Narrative itself 
replicates the joining of the factual to the imaginative. That Morrell's logbooks 
were "worked up" by one of the Harper Brothers' most successful writers, and 
that the Narrative itself was extremely popular, emphasize the representative 
45 
 nature of "MorrelFs" attitudes.21 A work suggestive of common cultural 
sentiments, Morrell's Narrative deserves close analysis. 
Morrell employed the methodology of chronology and classification in 
organizing his Narrative, offering his reader a first-person account in the manner 
of the conventional travel book or guide, "a plain but correct narrative": "July 
1st.—At six o'clock P. M., having discharged the pilot, we took our departure 
from Sandy Hook lighthouse, bearing W.N.W. distant seven leagues, and steered 
a S.E. course, with a fine breeze on our starboard beam."22 Here his style is 
utilitarian, factual and unadorned, a style that impresses the reader with the 
author's precision. 'This was on the afternoon of Monday, the first day of July, 
1822; a year rendered somewhat memorable in the city of New-York," he wrote, 
"by the last visitation of that terrible scourge, the yellow fever, which made its 
appearance about the 1 st of August, a month after our departure, and did not stay 
its ravages until the October following" (30). In this sentence the sincerity and 
literalness of the writer become clear, desiring to leave nothing out and to 
communicate his concern for those who did not journey with him but suffered the 
effects of the disease. He encouraged the reader to remember the year and the 
month, to recollect his own actions, yet he also encouraged the reader to begin to 
identify with Morrell: "The favourable auspices under which we commenced our 
voyage were hailed as auguries of a successful result, and soon banished from our 
minds every little tender regret which parting interviews might have left lingering 
about the heart" (30). Like Morrell, the reader was urged to put the past, his own 
past, behind him, as if it had been a mere sentimental fancy, and join himself to 
the fortunate schooner Wasp. 
The identification of American readers with the authors of exploration 
narratives is crucial, for it prepared the way for wide-spread acceptance of the 
values, attitudes and goals that the narratives embody and communicate. The 
inherent authority of the first-person narrative form and style prepared the reader 
to accept, and maneuvered the reader to adopt, the author's judgments: 
Notwithstanding the length of time which has elapsed since the 
discovery of the western continent, and the consequent im­
pulse given to the spirit of discovery, it is a remarkable fact that 
the most interesting section of this terraqueous globe still 
remains unexplored, and almost totally unknown. It is a 
reproach to every civilized country, that the people of this 
enlightened age possess so little accurate knowledge of the 
seas, islands, and perhaps continents which exist in the polar 
regions of the southern hemisphere. (29) 
Though the rhetoric here is anything but plain, the reader had no other judge than 
Morrell for whether it was correct Accepting the donnée of first-person 
narratives of exploration insured accepting the narrator's speculations. "Many 
enterprising navigators of the last and present centuries have made highly 
46 
 laudable, and some of them partially successful, attempts to penetrate the cloud 
of mystery which still hangs over the Antarctic Seas. But every one has stopped 
at a certain point, timidly shrinking from the farther prosecution of what they 
deemed an impractical project" (29). Morrell gave earlier captains their due, 
noting in passing an important point about exploration: even failures are part of 
a progressive movement toward ultimate success; although James Weddell did 
not reach the Antarctic Continent in 1822, he showed the way for others to 
penetrate deeper and deeper into the Antarctic Seas. An individual's partial 
success is never failure. 
South Sea Whaling Fishing, 1831, by Robert Salmon. OU on Panel, 16 1/2 x 
23 3/4 in. Gift of Joseph P. B. Henshaw. Courtesy of Museum of Fine Arts, 
Boston. 
In addition, Morrell attacked the notion that Antarctic exploration was 
impractical by conjuring up only to dismiss images of mysterious dread. 
Some, it is said, have even been deterred by a superstitious 
notion that an attempt to reach the South Pole was a presump­
tuous intrusion on the awful confines of nature,—an unlawful 
and sacrilegious prying into the secrets of the great Creator; 
who, they will contend, has guarded the 'ends of the earth' with 
an impassable bulwark of indissoluble ice; on which is written, 
'Thus far shalt thou come, but no farther, and here shall thy 
proud course be stayed. ' Such an idea would have become the 
inquisitors of Spain in the days of Columbus. (29) 
47 
 The mocking tone appealed to the rationality of readers, to their pride in 
superiority over ancestors, to their spirit of nationalism, to their faith in progressivism
and to their desire for knowledge. 
Admitting for a moment, however, that such is the fact, and that 
nothing less than a miracle could open the passage through this 
formidable barrier, I contend that genius, science, and energy 
combined can work miracles, and even remove mountains; for 
what is a miracle but the power of spirit over matter—the 
triumph of mind over physical impediments. The march of 
intellect is irresistible; and were the earth itself one globe of ice, 
the fire of genius, directed by the wand of science, could melt 
a passage to its centre. The day is not far distant when a visit 
to the South Pole will not be thought more of a miracle than to 
cause an egg to stand on its point. (29-30) 
Although the appeal may appear temptingly Emersonian, "to see the miracu­
lous in the common," it insisted not on transcendence but on common sense in the 
image of the egg. Americans should not stand in reverent awe before nature; 
nature is an egg which common sense, genius, science and energy can stand on 
end. No transcendent truth resulted from such manipulation; rather, the miracu­
lous was de-mythified, stripped of its superstitious power and made available to 
all as shared knowledge. The Spanish Inquisitor was gone, as was the image of 
a wrathful God jealously protecting his creative secrets. How could Americans 
have felt anything but supreme confidence in the resourcefulness, ingenuity and 
genius that Morrell's Narrative exemplified and imaged forth in its rhetoric? 
How could they do anything but desire to penetrate "the awful confines of 
nature"? 
To the only free nation on earth should belong the glory of 
exploring a spot of the globe which is the ne plus ultra of 
latitude, where all degrees of longitude are merged into a single 
point, and where the sun appears to revolve in a horizontal 
circle Would to heaven it [the attainment of the South Pole] 
might be set among the stars of our national banner! (67-68) 
Morrell's Narrative explicitly identified the discovery of the Antarctic continent 
as a goal—one shared by the practical Edmund Fanning—by which American 
identity would be confirmed. 
American sea fiction of the early nineteenth century was also decidedly 
nationalistic. As sea fiction and explorers' narratives evolved along interpen­
etrating and cross-fertilizing lines, it is not surprising that several important 
connections exist between these genres. First, as Thomas Philbrick points out of 
James Fenimore Cooper, whom he credits with the creation of the American sea 
48 
 novel, "Cooper's three-year service as a midshipman... made him view the sea 
not only as the arena of personal adventure but as the locus of national glory."23 
Implicit in this assertion is the suggestion that Americans were going to sea in 
increasing numbers from various classes; as this occurred, Americans' attitudes 
toward the sea would undergo a transformation that would compel some to reveal 
these new attitudes in literature (Cooper, Dana, and Melville being the obvious 
examples), and that would additionally engender a greater appreciation of these 
attitudes among the larger population of readers. Second, as Cooper himself 
reiterated in The Notions of Americans in 1828, "the laboring classes read more 
. . . of adventure than anywhere else," a kind of reading that encouraged "the 
restlessness of moral excitement."24 Cooper asserted that Americans read 
narratives of exploration voraciously, and that there was a moral dimension to 
these narratives, one that kindled interest in the unknown and exotic, communi­
cated itself to Americans through the act of reading and revealed itself as a 
nautical twist on Manifest Destiny. Adventure and exploration became cultural 
goals symbolic of individual and collective fulfillment Third, Cooper indicated 
not only the currency of exploration narratives within American culture but also 
their value to writers of fiction. One did not literally have to review the narratives 
of William Scoresby and William Parry, as Cooper did for The Literary and 
Scientific Repository and Critical Review in the 1820s,25 to be shaped by them; 
these works formed one stone in the foundation of the writer's culture, influenc­
ing his imagination, providing him with literary models and defining to a great 
extent the expectations of his reading audience. 
The reception of Cooper's early sea novels in the press illustrates popular 
sentiments. A review of Cooper's Pilot in the 1824 New-York Mirror identified 
Cooper as a staunch patriot and generalized upon the attendant nationalism his 
fiction created. 
We have long fixed our eyes on America as the refuge and 
conservatory of all those principles and institutions which are 
truly valuable, and which, under the name of Liberty, compre­
hend the right of free and fair exertion of all the faculties and 
powers of man, the absence of all fettering restrictions on 
industry and talent, equal privileges of thought and action to 
all, and protection in the fullest extent to property of every 
description. Believing that all this is substantially realized in 
the United States, we cannot avoid taking a deep interest in 
every thing which tends to generate a binding national spirit in 
their citizens, and to awaken in them a well-grounded pride in 
their own feats, as well as in their institutions. 
To Cooper's reviewer, not only did The Pilot realize "the just pride and best 
energies of America" but it "characterized that skill and resolution from which her 
future glories are to be derived at sea." Dismissing Irving, Smollett and Defoe, 
49 
 the writer praised Cooper's "truth and force" of description, in which "yet nothing 
is overwrought"; "but under all this apparent ease, a responsibility may be traced 
so deep, as if the honour of an infant republic, in her first struggles with the 
gigantic and confident power of the old empire, depended on the exertions of 
every individual."26 Language so effusive suggests that Cooper had given 
expression to deep-seated cultural attitudes. As he did so, Cooper fulfilled a 
cultural need and effectively codified American attitudes that could then be 
explored and enjoyed by the reading public. The reviewer identified in Cooper 
a democratic impulse ("the exertions of every individual"), a moral impulse ("a 
responsibility . . . so deep"), a national impulse ("the honour of an infant 
republic"), and a historical impulse ("in her first struggles") that itself affirmed 
the communal values of the visionary new empire—the United States. As a writer 
himself, he embraced Cooper as a national hero who had answered Sydney 
Smith's culturally troublesome question, "Who reads an American book?"27 
In the North American Review, another critic saw The Pilot as a stimulus to 
patriotic generalization: 
We have a commonplace, hackneyed sort of enthusiasm, on the 
subject of liberty, republican principles, etc. . . . But on the 
subject of our naval skill and prowess, although we are not 
willing to confess it, we are, yet, real enthusiasts. This is a 
string to which the national feeling vibrates certainly and 
deeply; and this string the author has touched with effect28 
Reviews in 1827 and 1828 in the Paris Globe also identified the well of 
nationalism from which Cooper drew. "The author [of The Pilot]... seems to have 
wished, in the name of his nation, to take a sort of literary possession of an element 
of which England long dared to claim a monopoly."29 
Cooper writes as citizen and as a philosophical man at the same 
time. In him one finds human reason that is remarkably free of 
prejudice, enlightened moral feeling, profound faith in liberty, 
in equality, in religion, in his country, in the dignity of human 
nature Above all, one recognizes in Fenimore Cooper the 
noble type of an American republican.30 
The author of The Red Rover was "a sincere patriot" who was able to "pour out 
his soul, to throw open the gates of his imagination, and to celebrate a country and 
a cause which was close to his heart."31 Though there is certainly here the barely 
concealed need to affirm vicariously French republican dreams through praise of 
Cooper, nonetheless Cooper's sea fictions were widely recognized as optimistic 
expressions of American nationalism. In addition, as popular and critical 
successes, they indicate a widespread approval of the values (however muddled 
they may seem to twentieth-century readers) they were seen to exemplify. 
50 
 Cooper was not alone in writing sea fiction that celebrated American 
nationalism and the spirit of exploration. In the 1820s a host of writers created 
an increasing body of patriotic sea fiction that includes Symzonia (1820) by 
"Captain Adam Seaborn," The Memoirs ofLcfitte; or the Barratarian Pirate 
(1827), The Buccaneers (1827) by Samuel B. Judah, and the sensational or 
supernaturally charged stories of William Leete Stone, Robert Montgomery 
Bird, Samuel Hazzard, William Leggett and James Kirke Paulding. Sensational 
sea fiction continued to grow in popularity throughout the 1830s and 1840s, 
emphasizing again and again the themes of national pride and individual ability 
in the works of Charles E. Averill, Benjamin Barker, B. Boy ton and "Frank 
Forester"—Maturin Murray Ballou. Edward G. Cox devotes a chapter of A 
Reference Guide to the Literature of Travel to "Fictitious Voyages and Travels," 
while Myron J. Smith and Robert L. Weller in their Sea Fiction Guide compile 
more than 200 pages of nautical adventures.32 As with Cooper's, these works 
might focus on explicitly patriotic themes such as pre-Revolutionary American 
piracy, American naval prowess during the Revolutionary War, the exploits of the 
American navy during the War of 1812, or they might take the theme of 
exploration itself—as in Symzonia—as a means of exemplifying national feel­
ings of pride in present and future prospects. Even in such a sensational work as 
Robert Montgomery Bird's "The Ice-Island," an account of shipwreck among 
Arctic icebergs, the emotion of national pride wells up at the conclusion as the 
narrator spies "the starry flag of my country" on the ships about to rescue him.33 
Beneath these levels of fact and fiction lie the subliterary chapbooks, 
broadside ballads and mariners' sketches typified by Archibald Duncan's The 
Mariner's Chronicle, Being a Collection of the most Interesting Narratives of 
Shipwrecks, Fires, Famines, and other Calamities Incident to the Life of Maritime
Enterprise. Firstpublished in London in \804,The Mariner' sChroniclewas 
quickly pirated and published in Philadelphia in 1806 and again in 1810. Its 
popularity caused the launching of a veritable armada of American collections. 
Burton Pollin has carefully established the publication history of The Mariner's 
Chronicle (New Haven, 1834), The Mariner's Library, or Voyager's Companion 
(Boston, 1834), The Mariner's Chronicle of Shipwrecks, Fires, Famines, and 
Other Disasters at Sea (2 vols., Boston, 1834), and R. Thomas' Interesting and 
Authentic Narratives of the Most Remarkable Shipwrecks, plus An Authentic 
Account of the Most Remarkable Events: Containing the Lives of the Most Noted 
Pirates and Piracies (New York, 1836, 1837, etc.).34 Keith Huntress has 
determined that between 1806 and 1857 no fewer than 15 important collections 
of chronicles were published in the United States, and that one of the main appeals 
of these chronicles was that they fostered and shaped a sense of nationalism.35 As 
to diversity of distribution and breadth of influence, he cites the example of the 
1806 Philadelphia four-volume Duncan Mariner's Chronicle given by Richard 
Manning to his nephew Nathaniel Hawthorne around 1832; Hawthorne later 
presented the Chronicle to his friend Herman Melville in 1851.* 
51 
 Although these chronicles and chapbooks might have been designed to 
appeal to those laboring classes Cooper identified, their influence was not limited 
to those classes. In addition, although we might assume that they passively 
reflected cultural attitudes, it is also probable that they actively helped mold 
cultural attitudes. This would have been especially true in New England seaports, 
where these popular tales and songs helped American seamen define regional and 
national stereotypes, develop and refine sets of values to share, and take pride in 
their identification with a particular group—American seamen. Scholars of 
American ballads and sea shanties such as Stan Hugill and G. Malcom Laws, Jr., 
have identified the popularity of songs such as "The Constitution and the 
Guerrière," "Paul Jones's Victory," "Major Andre's Capture" and "The Battle of 
New Orleans"; to recognize their popularity is to begin to recognize nationalistic 
feelings in the process of codification.37 It is also to understand the various lessons 
that patriotic songs and even work songs themselves taught In order to maintain 
American independence and to insure future national prominence, American 
seamen had to possess a shared belief in individual bravery and resolution, in the 
ability of the individual to overcome overwhelming odds, in the need for 
individuals to work together despite diversity, in the value of perseverance and 
tenacity, in the inevitable triumph of good over evil, and in the identification of 
America as a land of metaphysical goodness. 
Additionally, as John A. Scott notes of the common work songs of American 
seamen, "the songs these men created and sang and taught to each other helped 
them to face and overcome dire, daily peril, to undergo backbreaking toil, to cope 
with monotony and boredom, to summon inspiration for life from the bottom of 
their souls, and, above all, to woik together."38 Emphasizing the immediate 
instead of the ephemeral, popular songs and tales contributed to American 
nationalism without offering a visionary goal like the discovery of the South Pole. 
Instead, they provided a common mythology, a communal sense of national 
identity. 
The visionary clearly outdistances the immediate and practical in "Captain 
Adam Seaborn's" Symzonia. Whether Symzonia is a Utopian work or a satire, and 
whether its author is John Cleves S ymmes, Nathaniel Ames, or another writer, are 
still matters of scholarly debate. J. O. Bailey, in his modern edition of Symzonia, 
argues that "the evident intention of the book is to 'prove' Symmes' theory in a 
matter-of-fact record of discovery of the internal world."39 What the book seems 
to prove is a general cultural awareness of Symmes' theory. A review of 
Symzonia in the North American Review assumed as well its readers' familiarity 
with Symmes while taking the narrative less seriously: "we take leave, out of 
justice to merit to say, that we think Col. Symmes fairly entitled to the credit of 
a theory, which never entered into the head of any other man before; and of which, 
much as we should expect from the fruit of his lecturing—if he lectures as well 
as he speculates—we have strong doubts whether it will ever enter into the head 
of any body again."40 Seaborn claims for America the entire Symzonian Inner 
52 
 World, dwarfing the achievements of Columbus and revealing the superiority of 
the United States. Symzonia explicitly unites the search for new knowledge 
characteristic of exploration narratives, popular pseudo-science in John Cleves 
Symmes' Theory of Concentric Spheres (1818), a fictional structure purporting 
to be an explorer's narrative, and the pioneering efforts of Symmes and Jeremiah 
N. Reynolds to have Congress authorize a United States Exploring Expedition. 
In 1818 Symmes began to promote his belief that the earth was hollow and 
consisted of concentric spheres; at either pole would be found a hole, through 
which a United States Exploring Expedition should be sent. Called by some the 
"Newton of the West," Symmes can be understood as a product of what William 
Stanton terms "equalitarian contempt for learning" and "cultural patriotism"— 
democratic anti-intellectualism buoyed by the optimistic belief that the United 
States would give rise to brilliant individual thinkers perhaps because of their lack 
of formal education.41 Even those who, like the mathematician Thomas Johnston 
Matthews, dismissed Symmes' theory as fancy, recognized in Symmes an 
effective popularizer of science and an effective agent to stimulate public interest 
in national support of exploration. In the era that produced the awkward 
beginnings of a national coast survey, Symmes' attempts to mobilize national 
forces for exploration helped create in the American mind an acceptance of the 
idea of American exploration. At the least, Symmes' lecturing and letter-writing 
made Americans familiar with the notion of a national exploring expedition. 
Mathematician Matthews himself encouraged the expedition to the Pole, for even 
"if the region he goes in search of, should prove a fairy land, still his enterprizing 
spirit would be likely to render us better acquainted with the arctic zone."42 
"Captain Adam Seaborn"—that most American of American explorers— 
completed in fiction Symmes' projected voyage to the South Pole. Though the 
sights he sees echo scenes from Coleridge's "Rime of the Ancient Mariner," Mary 
Shelley's Frankenstein and Lord Byron's Childe Harold s Pilgrimage, Seaborn 
dismisses any hint of supernaturalism as outdated superstition. Confident 
American seamen like Seaborn, Fanning and Morrell had no use for fanciful 
gothicism. Likewise, though Seaborn refers to Captain Cook, he reserves his 
highest praise for his inventive countryman, Robert Fulton. A true patriot, 
Seaborn is on "a voyage of discovery, in the hope of finding a passage to a new 
and untried world... to new fields for the enterprize of my fellow-citizens, [to] 
supply new sources of wealth, fresh food for curiosity "43 The Inner Continent 
had value both as a location of exploitable wealth (e.g., new sealing grounds) and 
as a source of progressive ideals realized in pure form. To discover Symzonia was 
to discover a pre-lapsarian world in which the real and the ideal are in harmony, 
in which morality, intellect and technology sound a dominant chord. Led by 
Captain Adam Seaborn, Americans could achieve through Symzonia a second 
opportunity for perfection, a goal as old as the New World itself and one 
intimately connected to American myths of cultural regeneration and national 
definition. 
53 
 On August 3,1826, Jeremiah N. Reynolds, drawing upon the popular interest 
in Symmes' theory and in American exploration, initiated a correspondence with 
Secretary of the Navy Samuel L. Southard. As Richard G. Woodbridge III 
explains, a letter from Professor Samuel Miller of the Princeton Theological 
Seminary to Southard verified that Reynolds was no crank though an advocate of 
Symmes: "Mr. Reynolds... proposes in Oct or Nov. next, to undertake a voyage 
of observation & discovery toward the South Pole. These enterprising adventur­
ers expect to be accompanied by a considerable corps of scientifick gentlemen."44 
Southard's August 7 reply, though cautious, demonstrates that he had at least 
heard Reynolds in public: 
I have heard Mr. Reynolds lecture once & had a short conver­
sation with him and altho' I do not believe his theory [Symmes' 
Hollow Earth Theory], yet I feel anxious that he should be 
successful in fitting out his vessels & have every means in his 
power to render his voyage useful.... The voyage, if well 
conducted, cannot fail to be profitable to science—and we all, 
individually and nationally, owe a debt which it is time for us 
to set about discharging 45 
Southard expressed commonly held American attitudes in his rejection of 
Symmes and his acceptance of exploration as a national goal. He also illustrates 
a characteristic pairing of individual with national aspirations. Reynolds wisely 
made an ally of Edmund Fanning, the New England sealer known as the 
"Pathfinder of the Pacific" and later the author of Voyages Round the World 
(1833). Nearly twenty years before, Fanning had himself persuaded President 
Madison to support a United States Exploring Expedition to the South Seas, an 
expedition that was canceled by the War of 1812. With Fanning' s help, Reynolds 
tied the visionary quest to the practical needs of American sealers, whalers and 
merchantmen for accurate navigational charts and the establishment of safe 
harbors—needs that were nationalistic and would themselves foster nationalism. 
Having dissociated himself from Symmes, Reynolds addressed the House of 
Representatives in 1828 on "Antarctic Exploration"; a bill authorizing a U.S. 
Exploring Expedition passed the House, received popular support in the press and 
resulted in the public launching of the rebuilt sloop-of-war Peacock. The NewYork
Mirror rhapsodized that the Peacock and its mission reflected the "spirit of 
the age" and augured "a long career of glory" for the nation. The launching 
revealed to the populace that America's destiny would be fulfilled as much by 
"cultivating the arts and sciences in times of peace" as by "energy and valor in 
times of war."46 Despite such public displays of enthusiasm for the expedition, 
the expedition bill met defeat in the Senate. Discouraged but not personally 
defeated, Reynolds organized with Fanning the private "South Sea Fur Company 
and Exploring Expedition" in 1829; sailing with Captains Palmer and Pendleton, 
Reynolds and the Expedition were minimally successful—Palmer Land was 
54 
 discovered and named, though the expedition was financially profitless. As 
Pendleton concluded, had theirs been an officially sponsored United States 
Exploring Expedition, "the result... would have been highly beneficial to the 
commerce, navigation, whale and seal fishery, &c, of our nation."47 
'Talmer's Land as Seen from the South Shetlands." From Voyages Round 
the World by Edmund Fanning (1833). Courtesy of Peabody Museum of 
Salem. 
A national exploring expedition was clearly the next step. Fictions including 
Cooper's The Monikins (1835) and The Sea Lions (1849), Poe's Narrative of 
Arthur Gor^n Pym (1837-38), and "Peter Prospero's" 'The Atlantis" (1838-39) 
sent imaginative voyagers to the South Pole, thereby stimulating public interest 
in a national expedition, but it was largely through the continuing efforts of 
Reynolds that an actual expedition took shape. In 1835 he presented the first 
comprehensive analysis of United States interests in the Pacific in his "Report 
. . . in Relation to Islands, Reefs, and Shoals in the Pacific Ocean, &C."48 In 1836 
he again spoke before the House of Representatives, delivering his "Address on 
the Subject of a Surveying and Exploring Expedition to the Pacific Ocean and 
South Seas" to an enthusiastic audience. The "Address," "With Correspondence 
and Documents," was published immediately by the enterprising Harper & 
Brothers of New York. It was favorably reviewed by journals including the North 
American Review and Poe's Southern Literary Messenger.*9 The North Ameri­
can Review stated that "At present there are none, to whom the Pacific is a source 
of greater interest than to the inhabitants of the United States" (396). 'This is 
55 
 undoubtedly a work, which both for its utility, and the labor required for its 
accomplishment," the Review continued, "may rank with the most extensive and 
beneficial plans ever conceived. The merit of originating this vast project belongs 
exclusively, we believe, to our nation" (371). Quoting liberally from the 
"Address" and from the numerous testimonials Reynolds included—in particular 
a long list of items from Yale's Professor Benjamin Silliman "deserving of 
especial interest in your voyage towards the South Pole" (381)—the Review 
concluded that "we question whether an enterprise has ever been undertaken, of 
more immediate and extensive utility, both to commerce and science, than this" 
(388). Having made explicit the bonds between nationalism and commerce that 
will be strengthened by the expedition, the writer penultimately cast the expedi­
tion in mythic terms: the men who sail with the expedition "must consider 
themselves, in fact, as pioneers" (389). 
Poe, in the Southern Literary Messenger, sounded similar notes: "the public 
mind is at length thoroughly alive on the subject"; he rehearses "the great national 
advantages derivable from an exploring expedition" (68) and states that "here is 
a wide field open and nearly untouched—'a theatre peculiarly our own from 
position and the course of human events'" (69). The last two pages are entirely 
quotations from Reynolds' "Address": "Indeed, while there yet remains a spot 
of untrodden earth accessible to man, no enlightened, and especially commercial 
and free people, should withhold its contributions for exploring it, wherever that 
spot may be found on earth, from the equator to the poles!" (70). The call was 
intellectual, scientific and commercial. "Have we not shown that this expedition 
is called for by our extensive interests in those seas . . . ?" (70). The call was also 
patriotic: "Have we not shown, that this expedition is called for by national 
dignity and honor?" (70). And it was ultimately epistemological: "Who so 
presumptuous as to set limits to knowledge, which, by a wise law of Providence, 
can never cease? As long as there is mind to act upon matter, the realm of science 
must be enlarged; and nature and her laws be better understood, and more 
understanding^ applied to the great purpose of life" (70). As Reynolds con­
cluded in his "Address" to the House in 1836, 
The enterprize should be national in its object, and sustained by 
the national means,—belongs of rights to no individual, or set 
of individuals, but to the country... pushing their adventurous 
barks within the Antarctic Circle, and attain the Pole itself; yea, 
to cast anchor on that point where all the meridians terminate, 
where our eagle and star-spangled banner may be unfurled and 
planted, and left to wave on the axis of the earth itself!... If this 
should be realized, where is the individual who does not feel 
that such an achievement would add new lustre to the annals of 
American philosophy, and crown with a new and imperishable 
wreath the nautical glories of our country! (72) 
56 
 Reynolds focused American eyes on the Antarctic and, by means of his identifi­
cation of the quest for the South Pole with American selfhood, shaped American 
hopes and aspirations. 
The culmination of these trends in American exploration resulted in the first 
United States Exploring Expedition, that of Charles Wilkes, 1838-1842, to the 
South Seas and the Antarctic. Wilkes' was the first national exploring expedition 
commissioned by Congress. When President Andrew Jackson signed the 
Expedition's bill in 1836, he marked the convergence of American interest in 
exploration and exploration narratives, sea fiction and mariners' chronicles, 
science and pseudo-science and democratic lobbyist politics and patriotic nation­
alism. The orders to Lt. Charles Wilkes from Secretary of the Navy James Kirke 
Paulding were clear: "Although the primary object of the expedition is the 
promotion of the great interest of commerce and navigation, yet all occasions will 
be taken, not incompatible with the great purpose of the undertaking, to extend 
the bounds of science, and to promote the acquisition of knowledge."50 The North 
American Review revealed the popular belief that the Exploring Expedition's 
main purpose was the discovery of the South Pole even as it sought to correct the 
public's misperception: "It seems to be imagined by some, that its final destina­
tion is to be within the Antarctic Circle, or at least that it is to cruise principally 
in the high Austral latitudes... but there appears to be no reason (we speak under 
correction) for giving it much importance as an end of the expedition."51 Yet as 
Poe had noted in his Southern Literary Messenger article, "the public mind is at 
length thoroughly alive on the subject" Edmund Fanning had as early as 1833 
crystallized the feelings of Americans in a chapter of his popular Voyages entitled 
"Views Upon the Practicability of Sailing or Advancing to the SouthPole": "what 
is there to prevent reaching the South Pole?"52 The significance of the Antarctic 
to the American mind, to a self-conscious and progressive view of American 
history, to expanded notions of Manifest Destiny and world prominence and to 
an ideal of national identity, are clear. An optimistic, progressive, patriotic, 
practical and successful model of America and the American individual is 
embodied in the confident prose of exploration narratives that became associated 
with the exploration of the Antarctic. 
The United States Exploring Expedition sailed from 1838 to 1842. Lt 
Charles Wilkes with six ships and a scientific corps charted sealing and whaling 
grounds, recorded Atlantic, Pacific and Antarctic Ocean currents, collected tons 
of specimens, documented the customs, behavior, languages and music of the 
peoples they encountered, signed treaties and formed a visible American naval 
presence, made two forays into Antarctic waters and sailed the Antarctic coast for 
more than 1000 miles. William Reynolds, an officer on the expedition, neatly 
summarized for himself its cultural significance: "Behold! now a nation, which 
but a short time ago, was a discovery itself . . . is taking its place among the 
enlightened of the world, and endeavoring to contribute its mite, in the cause of 
knowledge."53 Secretary Paulding's instructions to Wilkes suggest the degree to 
which the United States had, in the official rhetoric of the government, achieved 
57 
 secure status as an equal nation within the global community: "The Expedition 
is not for conquest, but discovery. Its objects are all peaceful; they are to extend 
the empire of commerce and science; to diminish the hazards of the ocean, and 
point out to future navigators a course by which they may avoid dangers and find 
safety."54 
"Peacock in Contact with an Ice-berg." From Narrative of the United States 
Exploring Expedition by Charles Wilkes (1845). Vol. 2. Collection of the 
author. 
The nationalism resulting in the U.S. Exploring Expedition was in large 
measure engendered, fostered and given shape by early nineteenth-century 
explorers' narratives, sea fiction and mariners' chronicles. In the American 
search for self-definition, they provided a direction and a realizable goal that 
would enable the public to conceive of the nation as part of an international 
community. For many Americans, exploration—in fact, in fiction, and in the act 
58 
 of reading—was a means to secure, confirm and promote individual and national 
identity. Toward the Pole Americans raced, first in imagination and then in 
reality. 
Notes 
1. William H. Goetzmann, New Lands, New Men: America and the Second Great Age of 
Discovery (New Yoik, 1986), 229. 
2. Although I recognize how tentative generalizations about nineteenth-century readers must 
be, I have chosen the North American Review and the American Journal of Science as representative 
of two classes of American readers, the interested generalists and the scientifically interested. John 
B. Mason writes of the North American Review that "by 1824 the Review had achieved a circulation 
of about 4,000, the same as the American circulation of the Edinburgh Review and the Quarterly 
Review.** In addition, "the Review considered its foremost duty that of encouraging American writers 
and the developing of a unique American literature," Edward E. Chielens, éd., American Literary 
Magazines: the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries, (New York, 1986), 290. Frank Luther Mott 
contends that in 1830 **the North American Review had reached a position of acknowledged power 
and influence. It was read by the leading men and was available in all the important reading rooms," 
A History of American Magazines, 1741-1850,5 vols. (Cambridge, Massachusetts 1957), H, 232. Of 
the American Journal of Science Mott concludes that it was "the greatest journal of general science 
founded during the Period of Nationalism..."; "of the high worth of the Journal's contributions to the 
development of scientific studies in America there can be no question," Mott, 1,151,305. Robert V. 
Bruce, in The Launching of Modern American Science, 1846-1876, (New York, 1987) states that the 
American Journal of Science functioned as "the nation's main channel of scientific communication," 
15. 
Li a provocative study of The New-York Magazine of 1790, David Paul Nord contends that 
"magazine reading in this era seems to have been a more broadly democratic activity than has usually 
been supposed [T]he magazine might be viewed as another arena for popular participation, in 
this case participation in the formerly elite culture of science and education, arts and letters, virtue and 
honor, cultivation and character." In Table 5, a content analysis, he estimates that 36.8 percent of the 
magazine's features were devoted to "Description (travel, exotica, slice of life, etc.)," "A Republican 
Literature: A Study of Magazine Reading and Readers in Late Eighteenth-Century New York," 
American Quarterly 40 (March 1988) 42-43,53. 
3. North American Review 2 (1815), 247-248. 
4. Goetzmann, New Lands, 229. See Chapter VI, 229-264. 
5. William C. Spengemann, The Adventurous Muse: The Poetics of American Fiction, 17891900
(New Haven, 1977), 66. 
6. American Journal of Science 16(1829), 321. 
7. Bruce, The Launching of Modern American Science, 127. 
8. Quoted in Thomas Philbrick, James Fenimore Cooper and the Development of American Sea 
Fiction (Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1961), 1-2. 
9. Abby Jane Morrell, Narrative of a Voyage to the Ethiopie and South Atlantic Ocean, Indian 
Ocean, ChineseSea.NorthandSouthPacifk Ocean, in the Years 1829,1830,1831 (New York, 1833; 
rpt. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 1970), 175. For other nationalistic passages, see pp. 102-103, 
113-114,164,175,199 and 225. Although her Narrative was ghostwritten by Col. Samuel L. Knapp, 
the frequency of these sentiments suggests that they are her own and not interpolations by Knapp. See 
Eugene Exman, The Brothers Harper (New York, 1965), 29-30. 
Abby Jane Morrell's Narrative also raises a series of interesting issues concerning gender. 
Although Abby Jane Morrell's and Benjamin Morrell's narratives seem to share common patriotic 
sentiments, each account emphasizes different experiences. Abby Jane Morrell's narrative seems 
more reflective and less goal-driven than her husband's, more historical and less visionary in its 
rhetoric and speculations. The desire to improve the lives of American seamen through moral 
education, or the call for American charts of American harbors are aims differing in degree and 
perhaps in kind from Benjamin Morrell's hope of "exploring a spot of the globe which is the ne plus 
ultra of latitude...." These differences might be the result of Benjamin Morrell's more obviously 
active role of Captain as opposed to hers as a passenger, or they could reflect culturally-based gender 
stereotypes of the activities and concerns appropriate to men and women. Some combination of the 
two seems most probable, especially as this will allow us to avoid designating either narrative as more 
representatively "American" than the other. 
More intriguing speculation concerns whether gender influenced the perceptions the Morrells 
recorded. If, as Annette Kolodny argues in The Land before Her: Fantasy and Experience of the 
59 
 American Frontiers, 1630-1860 (Chapel Hill, 1984), men and women conceived of "Nature,** 
"wilderness** and "paradise** in different terms having radically different values (3-13, 53-54), is it 
possible that Abby Jane Morrell recorded a different version of the (male) explorer's universe? What 
images, what attitudes, what metaphors, what language and whatforms did these alternative (female) 
fantasies take? 
Abby Jane Morrell*s narrative also raises questions about American readers. Would male and 
female readers be equally interested in both accounts, or would readers* interests divide along lines 
of gender? That both narratives were published by the Harper* s Family Library suggests a broad 
readership, but it would be useful to obtain sales figures. Any speculations even with figures would 
be complicated because both works were ghostwritten by men. How much Samuel L. Knapp 
masculimœdAbbyJaneMoireU*snarrative,orhow 
be impossible to determine. Are, for example, the self-deprecating comments she makes about herself 
and her sex her own? "The great difficulty we women feel in collecting information, is the want of 
order and classification of our thoughts... ,*' she wrote. "I doubt whether a scientific observer would 
have had more thoughts than passed through my teeming brain; but he would have known how to 
arrange them, and have drawn conclusions tending to establish known truths, or elicit new ones.. .** 
(223). 
Last, as so few explorers* narratives have been written during the early nineteenth century by 
American women (excluding overland accounts), is it possible to generalize about them at all? Other 
similar narratives need to be located. Later in the century American women did begin to travel 
extensively and to record their experiences in numerous narratives. Yet their purposes in traveling 
were most often either to see the sights previously designated as culturally significant (to make the 
Grand Tour of Europe or the Holy Land), or to engage in missionary work, two motives that seem at 
odds with the ante-bellum (male) explorers* motives. Are there traditions of female explorers' 
narratives that parallel, develop along with, or evolve from male explorers * narratives? We might also 
ask whether there are complementary or competing British and American traditions? 
Clearly, these tentative questions are beyond the scope of this study. But by analyzing the 
explorers* narratives by women in collections such as Harold F. Smith's American Travellers Abroad: 
A Bibliography of Accounts Published before 1900 (Carbondale, Illinois, 1969), we may begin to 
define reasonable speculations and construct more distinct hypotheses. 
10. George T. Davis, A Navy Second to None: The Development of Modern American Naval 
Policy (Westport, Connecticut, 1940,1968), 5. 
11. Goetzmann, New Lands, 247. See also Ahmed M. Metwalli, "Americans Abroad: The 
Popular Art of Travel Writing in the Nineteenth Century,** in Steven E. Kagle, éd., America: 
Exploration and Travel, (Bowling Green, Ohio, 1979), 68-82. 
12. Philbrick, Cooper and the Development of American Sea Fiction, 85. 
13. American Quarterly Review 4 (1828), 216. 
14. Percy G. Adams, Travel Literature and the Evolution of the Novel (Lexington, Kentucky, 
1983), 156. 
15. Wayne Franklin, Discoverers, Explorers, Settlers: The Diligent Writers of Early America 
(Chicago, 1979), 198,104. 
16. Edmund Fanning, Voyages Round the World (New York, 1833; rpt. Upper Saddle River, 
New Jersey, 1970), 66. 
17. Ibid., 436-438. 
18. Abby Jane Morrell, Narrative of a Voyage to the Ethiopie, 141-142. 
19. Ibid., 211. 
20. Ibid., 164. 
21. Fora thorough discussion of Wood worth* s authorship and Morrell* s popularity, see Burton 
Pollin, "The Narrative of Benjamin Morrell: Out of 'The Bucket' and into Poe* s Pym," Studies in 
American Fiction 4 (Autumn 1976), 157-172; and Eugene Exman, The Brothers Harper (New York, 
1965), 29-30. 
22. Benjamin Morrell, A Narrative of Four Voyages to the South Sea . .. and Antarctic Ocean 
. . . (New York, 1832), 30. Subsequent references to Morrell's Narrative will follow quotations 
parenthetically in the text. 
23. Philbrick, Cooper and the Development of American Sea Fiction, 42. 
24. Ibid., 49. 
25. James D. Wallace, Early Cooper and his Audience (New York, 1986), 85. 
26. Quoted in George Dekker and John P. McWilliams, eds., Fenimore Cooper: The Critical 
Heritage (London & Boston, 1973), 74-75. 
27. Ibid., 1. 
28. Ibid., 5. 
29. Ibid., 130. 
30. Ibid., 137. 
31. Ibid., 137. 
32. Edward Godfrey Cox.A Reference Guide to the Literature ofTravel, 2 (Seattle, Washington, 
1938), 470-487; Myron J. Smith and Robert L. Weller, Sea Fiction Guide (Metuchen, New Jersey, 
60 
 1976). See also Philbrick, Cooper and Sea Fiction, Chapter V, "An Ocean Unapproachable and 
Unknown: The Work of Cooper's Contemporaries, 1835-1850." 
33. RobertMontgomery Bkd^Thelce-Mand;* Philadelphia Monthly Magazine 1 (1827), 113. 
34. See Burton ¥o\}m, Edgar Allan Poe: The Imaginary Voyages (Boston, 1981), especially 1920.
35. Keith Huntress, Narratives of Shipwrecks and Disasters, 1586-1860 (Ames, Iowa, 1974), 
xiii,xvi. 
36. Ibid.,iax. 
37. See Stan Hugill, Shanties and Sailors' Songs (New York, 1969), especially 37-39; and G. 
Malcom Laws, Jr., Native American Balladry: A Descriptive Study and a Bibliographic Syllabus 
(Philadelphia, 1964), particularly 13-14. For similar examples of the process of identity confirmation 
through song among American prisoners of war during the Revolution, see George G. Carey, éd., A 
Sailor's Songbag: An American Rebel in an English Prison, 1777-1779 (Amherst, Massachusetts, 
1976). 
38. John A. Scott, The Ballad of America: The History of the United States in Song and Story 
(Carbondale, Illinois, 1966), 127. 
39. J. O. Bailey, Introduction, "Captain Adam Seaborn," Symzonia: A Voyage of Discovery 
(1820) (Gainesville, Florida, 1965), n. p. See also Hans-Joachim Lang and Benjamin Lease, "The 
Authorship ofSymzonia: The Case for Nathaniel Ames,"New England Quarterly 48 (1975), 241 -252; 
Goetzmann, New Lands, 258,260,437; Pollin, Poe: The Imaginary Voyages, 26 (also notes P. 14.3B, 
P. 14.18B, P. 24.14D); and William Stanton, The Great United States Exploring Expedition of 18381842
(Berkeley, 1975), Chapter 2, "Symmes' Hole." 
40. North American Review 13 (New Series 4,1), 141. See also the review of Symmes' Theory 
of Concentric Spheres in the American Quarterly Review 1 (March, 1827), 235-253. Additional 
insight into the popular regard for Symmes can be obtained from "A Chapter on Sharking," by "R.," 
which appears in the Knickerbocker! (1836), 14-24. Fishermen cut themselves free from a huge white 
shark that pulls them seaward. Where is the shark now? "Ask Captain Symmes" (24). Symmes also 
appears in Joseph Atterley's fanciful A Voyage to the Moon (New York, 1827). The American 
Quarterly Review, in considering Atterley's work, reprinted the following passage among numerous 
extracts: "I returned to the telescope, and now took occasion to examine the figure of the earth near 
the Poles, with a view of discovering whether its form favoured Captain Symmes' theory of an 
aperture existing there; and I am convinced that that ingenious gentleman is mistaken," American 
Quarterly Review 5 (March 1828), 73. 
41. Stanton, The Great United States Exploring Expedition, 11. 
42. Ibid., 11. 
43. "Captain Adam Seaborn," Symzonia :A Voyage of Discovery (New York, 1820; Gainesville, 
1965), 13. 
44. Richard G. Woodbridge IE, "J. N. Reynolds: Father of American Exploration," Princeton 
University Library Chronicle 45, (Winter 1984), 109. 
45. Ibid., 110. 
46. Stanton, Great United States Exploring Expedition, 20. 
47. Fanning, Voyages Round the World, 487. 
48. U.S., 23rd Congress, 2nd Session, House Exec. Doc. No. 105,1835. 
49. North American Review 45 (1837), 361-390; Southern Literary Messenger 3, (January 
1837), 68-72. In the following paragraph, page numbers will follow quotations parenthetically in the 
text 
50. Charles Wilkes, Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition, during the Years 
1838,1839,1840,1841,1842, 5 vols. (Philadelphia, 1845), xxix, 1. 
51. North American Review 45 (1837), 376. 
52. Fanning, Voyages Round the World, 473. 
53. Stanton, Great United States Exploring Expedition, 83. 
54. Wilkes, Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition, 1, xxviii-xxix. 
61 
