authorial professionalism 
and the literary marketplace 
1885-1900 
nelson lichtenstein 
During the last two decades of the nineteenth century professional 
authorship in America achieved its modern dimensions. The institutional 
and economic framework within which the American man of letters had 
functioned was reestablished on a new economic basis involving large and 
complex markets, relative economic security and a qualitatively new 
relationship between publisher and editor. The concept of authorial 
professionalism took root as a new generation of American writers threw 
off the last vestiges of a pre-commercial, romantic view of their craft. 
During the 1890s these authors became conscious of their role as producers 
of a literary commodity, which in common with other fruits of a market 
economy might be bought and sold at the highest price. The basis for 
much of this transformation lay in certain technological and demographic 
changes which wedded the entire institution of American literature more 
closely to a capitalist ethos. 
When American literature first took on a recognizable coloration 
in the early nineteenth century it inherited from its English background 
much of that nation's attitude toward the role of the man of letters in 
the creation and dissemination of his work. Traditionally, and perhaps 
mythically, the creative writer was not a professional author or a producer 
of a literary commodity but a gentleman amateur who exhibited his 
talent to his social equals but did not depend upon it for a living; or he 
accepted the patronage of a social superior and was still independent of 
the larger reading public. According to this tradition, the author wrote 
when the spirit moved him, enduring none of the pressures of commercial 
time and the market, sought reputation—"fame" in the Renaissance 
sense—but not publicity.1 
In England the industrial revolution had undermined this older 
35 
 tradition and laid the basis for a wider literary market, but most English 
figures of the Romantic period continued to reject their larger commercial 
"public" while contemptuously dismissing popular sentiment as a test of 
literary worth. The artist drew back from a vulgar world. And as 
Raymond Williams has explained it, the pressures of the market "create, 
as a defensive reaction, the separation of poets from other men and their 
classification into an idealized general person, 'Poet' or 'Artist' which was 
to be so widely and so damagingly received." The Romantic poet would 
make his appeal not to the living community, but to the great "mediator 
and . . . redeemer, Time."2 
The rise of a robust commercialism in the Jacksonian era also turned 
American writers from the test of contemporary sentiment. In his seminal 
essay, "The American Scholar," Ralph Waldo Emerson rejected the idea 
of popular patronage as the gauge of an artist's success. "His office," 
Emerson told the Harvard class of 1837, "is to cheer, to raise, and to 
guide men by showing them facts amidst appearances. He plies the slow, 
unhonored, and unpaid task of observation. . . . These being his 
functions, it becomes him to feel all confidence in himself and to defer 
never to the popular cry. He and he only knows the world."3 
The sheer failure of the literary world to support financially more 
than a handful of full-time writers reinforced the diffident attitude of 
such authors toward their public. Until 1835 American publishing re­
mained predominantly a local enterprise: almost all publishers were 
primarily retail booksellers. When such a publisher printed a work 
whose interest transcended local boundaries he sold printed sheets to 
booksellers in other towns who bound them up for distribution in their 
own small market. Moreover, most of these bookseller-publishers were 
notoriously undercapitalized. They normally shared the expenses of book 
production with the author by means of the "half-profit system" whereby 
each partner shared both in capital expenses, such as printing and trans­
portation costs, and in any profits which might result. For authors such 
as Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Washington Irving and James Fenimore
Cooper who could afford to pay for publication in advance, with 
the profits to come later, the system was quite lucrative, but for those of 
less popularity and financial independence—Edgar Allan Poe, Herman 
Melville, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Henry David Thoreau and others—the 
system was unworkable.4 
Although the growth of professional authorship in America required 
the development of a national market and well capitalized publishing 
houses, the extension of the railways and centralization of the publishing 
industry in New York and Philadelphia did not solve the problems of 
American writers because a flood of cheap English reprints depressed the 
domestic literary market. The lack of a copyright law kept American 
authors in competition with a huge and venerated contemporary literature, 
published largely without payment to even its foremost living masters. 
36 
 The large publishing houses of New York—Harper's, Appleton and 
Putnam—specialized in British and non-literary writing, as did their 
magazines—Harper's Monthly, Harper's Weekly, and Putnam's. It was 
left to the Boston houses, such as Ticknor and Fields, to publish much 
of the work of the "Renaissance" of the 1850s, but their reach was far less 
that that of New York and Philadelphia houses.5 
Thus before the Civil War, the publisher failed as patron to the 
American author, and the latter turned to the government, the lecture 
platform or some other source of income for his sustenance. Hence the 
well-known employment of Hawthorne at the Liverpool Consulate, of 
Emerson upon the lecture platforms of Illinois and Iowa, and of Melville 
in the notoriously corrupt New York customhouse. William Charvat, 
literary historian of early American authorship, has estimated that in 
the years before the Civil War 60 to 75 per cent of all male American 
writers either held public office or tried to get it.6 The inability of the 
institutions of American literature to support such writers reinforced 
the skepticism of the gentleman-author toward popular patronage, an 
attitude which in turn justified the contemporary cultural image of the 
writer as a Byronesque and impractical figure long into the latter half 
of the nineteenth century. 
The difficulties involved in publishing belles lettres before the Civil 
War were partially resolved after that conflict by the growth of the 
American magazine and its domination of the literary marketplace. 
Compared with the rather chaotic and provincial publishing arrange­
ments of the years before the war the great magazines of this time— 
Century, Harper's Atlantic, Scribnefs—and the publishing houses that 
stood behind them, provided a rather stable national market upon which 
the profession of authorship might base itself. Selling at 25 to 35 cents 
per issue, these magazines provided an adequate, even substantial income 
for those contributors who published consistently within their pages, and 
whose serialized novels or short stories later appeared as books from the 
publishing house which owned the magazine. William Dean Howells, 
for example, signed a contract with Harper Brothers for $10,000 for the 
serial rights to his annual output plus 12 per cent commission on the 
subsequent books. Charles Dickens received even larger sums from the 
same publishing firm. By the 1870s magazine serialization was virtually 
institutionalized as the first step in the publication of a well-known 
novelist's work.7 
The literary sources from which these magazines drew their material 
and the public to which they addressed themselves were narrow ones, 
far too narrow for a nation whose population doubled each generation 
and whose newspaper readership quadrupled every decade. In 1885 
Scribnefs, Century, Atlantic and Harper's had a combined circulation of 
only 600,000 in a nation approaching 75 million. Furthermore, these 
magazines provided American authors with a pitifully small market. 
37 
 As Frank Tooker, a long-time staffer on Century magazine remembered: 
"At that time [1885] every properly conducted magazine was expected to 
present to its public two long serial novels every year." Thus the bulk 
of the contents of a magazine might be scheduled as much as nine months 
in advance. When young Tooker joined the Century staff in 1885 Henry 
James' Bostonians and William Dean Howell's Rise of Silas Lapam were 
running; they were excellent literary choices indeed, but a cheerless 
prospect for those American authors who saw the Century closed to 
their work until the eminent serialists had unwound their plots many 
months ahead.8 
These magazines addressed themselves to a restricted audience not 
only because of their relatively large price but also because their editors 
accepted a model of the American reading public divided into the vulgar 
and the cultivated. The vulgar read newspapers, the cultivated read 
magazines. Newspaper readers were men who scanned the headlines 
with a cynical detachment; magazine readers were women and children 
of a far more impressionable nature. If the magazine's audience was a 
tenth the size of the newspaper, it was only because of the limited size 
of the genteel audience in America. Henry Mills Alden defended the 
relatively small circulation of Harper's in terms of that magazine's 
relationship to American culture. "Its constituency" he wrote "is limited 
to a cultivated audience, one which is constantly increasing with the 
steady advance of culture. The demands of that audience cannot be met 
by any standard lower than the best."9 
Furthermore this domestic readership had placed its literary trust in 
the wise hands of the discerning magazine editor. William Dean Howells, 
editor of Atlantic until 1881 and literary mentor to a generation of 
American writers who eventually broke with genteel standards, still 
defended the self-imposed limitations of such magazines as late as 1893. 
"Between the editor of a reputable English or American magazine and 
the families which receive it," Howells wrote, "there is a tacit agreement 
that he will print nothing which a father may not read to his daughter 
or safely leave her to read herself." While it was true, said Howells, that 
newspapers teemed with facts far fouler and deadlier than any which 
fiction could imagine, the reporter was less of a threat because he did 
not command the novelist's skill "to fix impressions in a young girl's mind 
or to suggest conjecture."10 
The editors of these magazines had assumed that their audience was 
a narrow one because they saw the public in highly stratified cultural 
terms. The relatively large prices charged for these magazines reflected 
their cost of production, but it was also a statement of the literary and 
cultural exclusiveness of their upper- and middle-class readership. This 
genteel perspective came to restrict severely the prospects for American 
authorship, in both financial and literary terms. As one disgruntled 
38 
 writer complained, "the female reader and her magazine was the Iron 
Madonna who strangles in her fond embrace the American novelist."11 
Yet a huge "vulgar" audience existed in America, represented in the 
cities by the readers of the penny press and the dime novel and in the 
country by the millions of subscribers to the local weekly and the clients 
of the subscription book agent. This audience was willing to patronize 
the literature of even the most genteel and Victorian magazines if only 
it were available in a cheap and ready fashion. In the 1880s the literary 
syndicate first tapped this audience for the serious writer. Newspaper 
syndicates had existed in America since the Civil War. Headquartered 
in Chicago, these journalistic institutions supplied rural weeklies with 
a steady flow of farming news, weather predictions, practical advice and 
Sunday sermons. In the 1870s the Kellogg Newspaper Company first used 
stereotype plates to supply the rural press with a variety of "patent 
insides," including children's serials and gossip columns from New York.12 
But it was not until the 1880s that magazine fiction distributed in this 
form reached as an audience large metropolitan newspapers. 
Samuel S. McClure, an imaginative M id westerner who came to seek 
his fortune in New York, first hit upon the idea of the literary syndicate 
while working for the Century company's youth magazine, St. Nicholas. 
His original plan was hardly innovative; it consisted merely of reprinting 
material from the back numbers of the Century and St. Nicholas in coun­
try newspapers. The rejection of this idea by his employers and his sub­
sequent dimissal from their dignified offices forced McClure to petition 
contemporary American authors for his material rather than glean it 
from back issues of those magazines. Their response was immediately 
favorable. McClure was working in a buyers market and the initial 
capital for his enterprise consisted almost entirely of the money he owed 
his contributors after the receipt of their stories and essays.13 
His syndicate worked on the simplest of principles, a simplicity that 
made it an extremely sensitive indicator of the popular taste. Upon 
receipt of a manuscript purchased from an author, McClure gave the 
story to a nearby metropolitan newspaper which in return printed up 
forty or fifty galley sheets. McClure sent these to the various newspapers 
that had indicated a willingness to try his syndicate. Because he had no 
contract with these newspapers, McClure received an immediate response 
from the editors each time he sold a story or serial anew. Editors who 
were dissatisfied with a serial could and did cut it off in the middle and 
refuse payment. Hence McClure knew precisely what the public sought, 
and he transmitted his desire, unconsciously or consciously, to his con­
tributors. Initially, McClure's syndicate contained roughly the same sort 
of material as that published in the quality magazines; his own tastes 
were rather romantic and sentimental. His earliest contributors included 
Bret Hart, H. H. Boyesen, Frank R. Stockton and Robert Louis Steven39

 son, whom McClure idolized, and whose journey to the South Seas the 
syndicate heavily subsidized.14 
McClure and the competitors who soon joined him essentially supplied 
the equivalent of a small literary magazine each week to their subscribers. 
Much of their material appeared in the Sunday supplements then 
enjoying a heyday in the metropolitan press. By 1887 McClure was 
publishing three full length serials, one by Jules Verne in thirteen 
papers, one by Julian Hawthorne in twenty and one by the very popular 
E. P. Roe in nineteen. In addition he published ten short stories per 
week. The volume of his syndicated material had soared from 5,000 
words per week in 1884 to over 100,000 in 1887. At the same time rival 
syndicalist Irving Bachellor was supplying the equivalent of a full Century 
magazine to the newspapers each week, while on a more popular level, 
Edward Bok had begun to distribute sentimental romances and advice to 
the woman's pages of country newspapers.15 
The advent of the literary syndicate had an immediate effect upon 
the relationship of the author to his work, his editor and the financial 
rewards of his industry. McClure's role in the newspaper syndicate was 
initially that of a literary agent who found new sources of income for 
material which passed through his hands essentially unchanged. In his 
role McClure dramatically expanded the demand for the short story 
and short essay, as well as the longer serial. His remuneration, which 
ranged from $30 for short sketches to $8,000 for a Robert Louis Stevenson 
adventure, equaled or surpassed the rates paid by the established literary 
monthlies. Even before the boom in ten- and fifteen-cent magazines a 
few years later, McClure and his competitors were forcing the price of 
short fiction to double what it had been before 1885.16 
As literary editors, McClure, Bachellor and other syndicators were 
released from the self-imposed restrictions which guided the editorial 
hand of the prestigious monthlies. For Richard Watson Gilder of the 
Century, this editorial function had essentially been the negative one, of 
censorship, of shielding his readers from material they might find 
offensive. But the syndicate editor was under no such compulsion. His 
medium was the metropolitan newspaper and McClure, for one, probably 
accepted the supposition that newspapers were essentially masculine fare. 
The hardboiled newspaper editors who reviewed syndicate essays and 
fiction held veto power over their publication; the responsibility did not 
lie with the owner of the syndicate. 
Furthermore, the increasing sensationalism of the daily press in­
fluenced the character of the syndicate's fiction. NewspajDer syndication 
presented an opening for those writers disposed to tinker with the new 
techniques of realism in American fiction. Before they had found the 
editorial doors of the quality magazines and publishing houses closed to 
their contributions, but the newspaper syndicates and the editors of the 
metropolitan press demanded dramatic, fast paced, realistic material. 
40 
 To the newspaper editor who sought to eliminate the difference between 
an event and its reportage, there could be equally little distinction 
between literature and life. Hence Bachellor's literary syndicate first 
published Stephen Crane's Red Badge of Courage in New York and 
Philadelphia papers after it had been rejected by a New York publisher. 
And McClure's syndicate (and later his magazine) published some of the 
first stories of Jack London and Frank Norris.17 
The syndicates of the 1880s had expanded the market for American 
literary property, but the ten- and fifteen-cent magazines had the most 
dramatic impact on the profession of authorship in this country. The rise 
of this new medium in the 1890s was directly linked to the nationalization 
of American business. The periodicals of the era became the first gener­
ation of American magazines to depend on advertising revenue for the 
bulk of their expenses, which until then had been limited by the region­
alism of American trade and business. The extraordinary growth of 
industry in the 1880s, the completion of a relatively dense rail network 
and the consolidation of nationwide industries provided the base for 
national advertising purchased by manufacturers and designed and 
distributed by modern advertising agencies. As the only national medium 
of the time, the American magazine was the chief beneficiary of this new 
source of revenue.18 
Aside from these basic structural changes, the federal government in­
directly subsidized magazine distribution by reducing rates for second-class 
matter from three to one cents a pound in 1885, and by establishing a sys­
tem of rural free delivery, begun experimentally in the 1890s. Finally the 
invention in 1889 of the half-tone process for the reproduction of handdrawn
illustrations or photographs immensely enhanced the possibilities 
of cheap magazine production. Prior to this development the single most 
expensive item in the production of the usual magazine article had been 
the illustrations. Half-tone photo reproduction reduced the cost of illus­
trations by ten-fold if photographs were substituted for costly hand 
drawings. A typical article in Century magazine, with three full page 
drawings and ten small ones might cost $125 for the text, but the artist's 
salaries and engraving fees could easily boost the total to $1,000.19 Use 
of the half-tone process not only reduced the overall cost of printing but 
also allowed the author's share of expenses to rise. The advantages of the 
half-tone process for photo reproductions, coupled with the flood of 
national advertising, left only a psychological and ideological barrier to 
the redefinition of the American literary magazine in terms of a mass 
heterogeneous audience. 
The depression of 1893 triggered the cheap magazine boom of the 
1890s. Frank Munsey first slashed his price from a quarter to a dime in 
October 1893 and the competition quickly followed suit. McClure, who 
had founded his magazine during the summer, was already at fifteen cents 
while John Brisben Walker's Cosmopolitan was forced to the curious 
41 
 price of I2y2 cents. The 1890s produced a score of cheap magazines. 
By 1905 their combined circulation totaled over five and a half million. 
By the end of the decade both McClure's and Munsey's were approaching 
circulations of 500,000 while the Ladies Home Journal probably sold 
700,000 copies each issue. In the offing was the revitalization of the 
Saturday Evening Post in 1899. By 1914 the Post printed 2,000,000 copies 
every week. This era, before the rise of such competitors as movies and 
radio, has been appropriately labeled the Golden Age of Magazines. The 
ten and fifteen centers had at least 85 per cent of the magazine field. While 
some, such as Munsey's or Edward Bok's Ladies Home Journal, aimed at 
either a lower-middle-class or exclusively woman's audience, McClure's, 
Collier's and Cosmopolitan competed directly with the older big four of 
the magazine world for both readers and contributors. Of these McClure 
unquestionably set the style and pace the rest were to follow; even arch 
rival Frank Munsey admitted it.20 
For both fiction and non-fiction the cheap mass circulation magazine 
was a key institution in the transformation of the authorial process. 
During the last years of the nineteenth century the creative initiative 
shifted subtly, almost unknowingly, from writer to editor and publisher. 
For the first time in American literary history, the writer had found a 
generous if exacting patron. In the 1890s many of the most important 
younger American authors responded to this change by adopting a 
thoroughgoing professionalism which rejected the earlier romantic view 
of their work and accepted, within bounds, the market as an arbiter of 
literary success. 
The relationship between S. S. McClure and the authors he employed 
illustrates the substance of this transformation. As a syndicate editor 
McClure had begun to order articles and stories from his writers, sug­
gesting ideas, topics and angles the syndicate hoped to cover.21 Now 
McClure centralized editorial control even more tightly. He made his 
editorial offices the creative podium of the modern magazine, and Mc­
Clure, the dynamic, imaginative, almost naively enthusiastic conductor, 
orchestrated the work with surprising sensitivity to an enlightened 
public taste. Within his organization McClure provided a never ending 
stream of ideas to his author-employees who fleshed them out into full­
blown articles, essays and stories. A magazine ought to be a unity, said 
McClure: 
It must represent the ideas and principles of one man or a 
group of like-minded men; it must have a single purpose all 
through. Anybody could make a magazine by hiring a competent 
staff of assistants, burying a certain amount of historical matter, 
a certain amount of fiction, of descriptive articles of travel, of 
poetry and so on and mixing them together in suitable proportions; 
but it would not make a good magazine nor would it be likely to 
be a success, lacking unity, the inspiration and direction of one 
central head.22 
42 
 To give institutional framework to this formula McClure created 
the first true magazine staff. He wanted his writers on salary directly under 
his control so that he could shape their ideas and the direction of their 
work. As Lincoln Steffens put it, "He did not edit copy, he edited men."23 
McClure's approach to magazine editing was an abrupt contrast to the 
genteel tradition of the older monthlies. While William Dean Howells 
was editor of Atlantic he spent most of his time in his study, working on 
his next novel, writing reviews of recent books and exercising his editorial 
functions in a passive manner, merely selecting those manuscripts which 
flowed into his office for publication. His relationship with his con­
tributors was so detached that on several occasions Howells published 
articles by authors of whose identity he was not aware, with embarrassing 
consequences when he was mistaken with regard to their sex. In 1893 
Howells edited the Cosmopolitan magazine for a short time but resigned 
because he was unable to adapt to the more demanding pace of its 
editorial duties.24 
Ida Tarbell's 1894 series on Napoleon Bonaparte propelled McClure's 
magazine toward financial success, and as much as any other work ex­
emplifies the nature of McClure's editorial imperialism. The genesis of 
the Napoleon series came when McClure found an excellent collection 
of the Emperor's portraits in the home of an acquaintance. The publica­
tion of these portraits would have a dual function; they would demon­
strate the capabilities of the new half-tone photo engraving process for 
magazine illustration and take advantage of the "Napoleon movement" 
then sweeping France and America. McClure sought out a lively text 
to augment the photographs. He soon turned to Ida Tarbell, a young 
writer recently home from Paris, who assured the editor she would write 
an appropriately romantic and dramatic life. The McClure-Tarbell 
Napoleon was published simultaneously with Century magazine's "Life 
of Napoleon," by the well-known European scholar William Milligan 
Sloane. The latter's was a sober, well-researched history, but hardly the 
publication bonanza Ida Tarbell wrote for McClure.25 Century's editor, 
Richard Watson Gilder, could hardly restrain his contempt after Tarbell 
wrote another popular and successful history for McClure's, her "Life of 
Lincoln." He summed up his entire view of the magazine with the 
remark, "They got a girl to write a life of Lincoln."26 
Gilder's contempt reflected the genteel opposition to what became 
known as the McClure method of magazine writing. McClure's non-fiction 
writers—Tarbell, Lincoln Steffens, Ray Stannard Baker, Will Irwin and 
many lesser lights—were permanent employees, the first true magazinists. 
Writing on only two or three subjects each year they kept one eye cocked 
to the editor's angle and another to journalistic and historical accuracy. 
To S. S. McClure "magazining was an art in itself": 
Only the magazine staff knows exactly how an article must be 
presented to be in line with the general attitude of the publication. 
43 
 That is the reason why I or some of my assistants always collaborate 
with the author of a great feature, even going so far as to investigate 
and study his sources of material so as to get into the very spirit of 
the work.27 
The muckraking articles of the early twentieth century were the most 
important and successful fruits of this system. Tarbell's History of 
Standard Oil took eighteen months to research and probably cost McClure's
magazine over $300,000. McClure first proposed Steffens' Shame 
of the Cities series and he sent the author on lengthy journeys to Chicago 
and St. Louis to begin research on the articles.28 
The McClure method was most relevant to the writing of non-fiction, 
but popular magazine editors also applied it to fiction. When McClure 
received unsolicited short stories from an unknown author stationed in 
the Philippines, McClure instructed Lincoln Steffens to offer the young 
man a job in the office and show him the kind of popular stories needed 
by the magazine. At one point or another in their careers, Stephen Crane, 
Booth Tarkington, Frank Norris and Hamlin Garland were under salary 
to S. S. McClure. In another context poetess Theodoria Garrison even 
supplied verse, of appropriate length and subject, immediately on de­
mand for the Butterick Magazine. In his memoirs, Hamlin Garland 
reported that such editors as Bok, McClure and George Horace Lorimer 
of the Saturday Evening Post "appeared so genuinely interested in me 
that it was hard not to write to their order, especially as I was poor and 
could only now and again finish a story which Alden or Gilder considered 
worthy of their approval. Therefore I found myself writing three part 
romances for the Ladies Home Journal . . . biographical studies for 
McClure's and stories of the mountain west for Lorimer's Post.2* Humor­
ist and journalist James L. Ford struck a note close to the truth when he 
satirized McClure's editorial methods in the pages of Puck. 
I paid a visit yesterday to the model village of Syndicate, 
founded by Mr. S. S. McClure for the benefit of the literary hands 
employed in his great enterprises, and I am bound to say that in 
point of neatness, order and the completeness of its sanitary ar­
rangements it is infinitely superior to the similar towns of Pullman 
or any of the colonies established by the late Baron Hirsch. . . . 
Mr. McClure took me through one of the large buildings and 
explained every detail of the work. Every morning the foreman 
goes from bench to bench and gives an idea to each author. Just 
before noon he passes along again and carefully examines the un­
finished work, and late in the afternoon, a final inspection is 
made, after which the goods are packed and sent down to the wharf 
for shipment. 
I inquired whether there was any truth in the report that 
several authors had been taken with severe illness immediately 
after beginning work at Syndicate, whereupon the foreman ex­
plained that this had happened several times but it had always 
resulted from giving an author a whole idea at once—something to 
which few of them had ever been accustomed.30 
44 
 Most of the established publishing houses resisted the innovations 
sweeping the magazine trade, but these new methods soon had a profound 
impact on the book world as well. American publishers had long fought 
a rear guard action against what they considered the "commercialization 
of literature." For many years the lack of an international copyright law 
had depressed the market for American literary material. Among Ameri­
can publishing houses competition for new uncopyrighted work had 
forced down the price of foreign books, and at the same time, vastly 
increased the number and variety of commercially attractive titles. 
To avoid unrestrained competition for this uncopyrighted material 
reputable American publishing houses evolved an institution known as 
"trade courtesy" whereby American publishers agreed to respect the 
arrangements each house had made with its British writers. Unfortunately 
this courtesy applied to American writers as well, and was decked out 
as the only proper mode of gentlemanly business conduct. As Henry 
Holt put it, "No one of [the old publishers] would go for another's 
author any more than for his watch."31 
Trade courtesy obviously limited the author's market freedom and 
potential remuneration, but the publishers defended the practice on the 
grounds that an intimate and longstanding relationship between an 
author and his publisher was essential to the writer's literary reputation.32 
As late as 1900 the institution was so strong that when Howells sought to 
change publishers, from Harper's, then undergoing a financial crisis, to 
Dodd Mead and Company, the latter refused his offer, though he certainly 
would have been a lucrative client. As long as authors saw themselves 
as gentlemen amateurs trade courtesy fit nicely into the genteel tradition 
of American letters. But after the passage of the copyright act in 1891 the 
institution became increasingly anachronistic, first for the author, then 
ultimately for the publisher as well.33 
Change soon came to the staid world of American book publication. 
In the 1880s the quickening pace of American magazine and syndicate 
publication was reflected in the book trade as the number of new titles 
rose each year. A truly dramatic increase took place in the 1890s, stimu­
lated by the vast fiction market in the new magazines and by the passage 
of the copyright act. By 1901 twice as many new works of fiction 
were issued annually than had been in 1890, while books of general 
literature and essays, many collected from articles previously published 
in the cheap magazines, had quadrupled in the decade.34 
Just as in the magazine and syndicate field this dramatic expansion 
of the author's opportunities was accompanied by the growing initiative 
publishers took in the creative process itself. In the 1880s and 1890s 
Henry Holt and G. P. Putnam produced a series of books on science, 
history and geography directed toward a lay audience. These books, 
written on the initiative of the publisher, were heavily edited and re­
written to suit a particular readership. Authors who contracted to 
45 
 produce this sort of work received a lump sum payment rather than a 
royalty, an indication in itself of the shift in the writers' relationship to 
the published product.35 
The public realization of these new circumstances became clear in 
1890 with the publication of Archdeacon Cannon Farrar's phenomenally 
successful Life of Christ. The work earned for its English publisher 
Cassell and Company over 50,000 pounds and for its author a far from 
paltry 9,000. Nevertheless Farrar protested loudly and vehemently in 
literary journals on both sides of the Atlantic, claiming he had been 
cheated of his just rewards as author of the book. Cassells defended itself 
on the grounds that "we projected a work which was to be a popular life 
of Christ. The whole scheme of that work as well as its general character 
was conceived in this house; Nay more, it was put into concrete form 
before Archdeacon Farrar received it. In addition it was extensively 
advertised."36 Commenting on this widely reported incident, publisher 
George Haven Putnam agreed that modern authors have no right to 
complain when publishers make large profits. With the increasing com­
plexity of the market and the importance of work written "to order" and 
on contract, authors need an acute publisher all the more. Putnam 
agreed with Cassells's that Cannon Farrar had received more than 
adequate compensation considering the relatively minor role he had 
played in initiating the best selling biography.37 
During the 1890s the tendency of the publisher to contract his books 
also extended to the realm of fiction. Publishers as much as writers pushed 
current fads in dialect humor, historical romance and foreign adventure. 
McClure pressured Frank Norris, for example, into several literary 
schemes: a series on great American battles, a trip to Cuba and Greece, a 
novel of the West.38 Commenting on this experience, Norris wrote: 
More novels are written—practically—to order than the public 
has any notion of. The publisher again and again picks out 
the man, suggests the theme, and exercises in a sense all the func­
tions of instructor, during the period of composition . . . Time 
was when the publisher waited for the unknown writer to come to 
him with his manuscript. But of late, the Unknown has so 
frequently developed, under exploitation and by direct solicitation 
of the publisher into a "money making proposition" in such 
formidable proportions that there is hardly a publishing house 
that does not now hunt out with all the resources at its command.39 
Most American authors welcomed the financial opportunities of the 
expanded literary marketplace, even if its price was a reduction in that 
theoretical independence the artist had previously known. This more 
limited view of the creative process came to be identified with the idea of 
literary professionalism in the writing trade. Professional writers shaped 
their material for a specific market or a particular editor. The new 
attitude was subversive of the genteel tradition in American letters, for 
it freed the writer from the obligations to an artificial unitary standard 
46 
 of culture and permitted the artist to deal quite frankly with the demands 
of the market. And to the extent that authors accepted their work as a 
commercial commodity, they were forced to abandon the Emersonian 
vision of the artist as moral guide and mentor to the populace. In truth, 
literary professionalism emphasized the skills needed for market success 
rather than the values traditionally associated with literary endeavor. 
During the 1890s this emphasis on writing professionalism took on the 
character of a minor social movement. One of its first institutions arose 
in 1887 with the founding of a new trade magazine, The Writer, subtitled, 
"a magazine for literary workers." Former newspaperman and editor 
William H. Hills designed the magazine to be "first and foremost a 
practical guide" to the writing of magazine and newspaper fiction and 
non-fiction. Hill's magazine was unique in its programmatic, marketoriented
approach to literature and the magazine's first responsibility was 
to the welfare of the writer rather than to literature per se. Its first 
articles included discussions of the law of libel, the use of plot outlines 
for novelists, as well as more prosaic tips on filing letters, using a type­
writer and saving money on postage.40 
A recurrent theme was an attack upon the creative artist as a romantic 
genius or gentleman dilettante. "It is no longer necessary for a literary 
man to wear long hair and roll open his shirt collar like Byron" cautioned 
a typical article, which then proceeded to catalogue the virtues of hard 
work and regularity necessary for success in the writing trade.41 Another 
contributor warned prospective writers not to wait for "inspiration to 
replace perspiration" as a source for their ideas. "Those who write for 
pleasure are the only ones who can afford to depend solely on 'genius'. 
As a profession these writers are not generally successful."42 
Perhaps the question which most clearly divided the new professionals 
from an older authorial generation was the compatibility of a writer's 
literary fame and his financial solvency. Thomas Wentworth Higginson 
spoke for an older generation when in an 1888 Harvard lecture he called 
upon American authors to choose between two mutually exclusive forms 
of success—fame or money. Though on rare occasions the two forms 
might be combined, he advised young authors to choose "for their peace 
of mind" which kind of success they most desired.43 Higginson applied 
this dichotomy to literary success because he mistrusted the market's judg­
ment. Like the editors of the genteel magazines, he conceived of the 
reading public in a rigidly hierarchical framework with a cultured minor­
ity above opposed to the more vulgar stratum below. Popular success 
could be a liability, reflecting the less refined tastes of the mass audience. 
Combining this perspective with a genteel belief in cultural progress, 
Higginson indicated that only some future more enlightened audience 
could identify and reward true literary genius. As Higginson put it: 
The greatest pain of authorship is the absolute impossibility 
of an author's determining what is his greatest work or of his 
47 
 knowing when he has a good thing or indeed whether he has ever 
accomplished anything. He cannot judge the quality of his work, 
nor for that matter can the editor or audience.44 
The new generation of writers repudiated Higginson's point of 
view. In the December 1890 issue of Writer a young lawyer and parttime
poet from Lewiston, Illinois compared the literary life and the legal 
career he was then reluctantly pursuing. Both were legitimate professions, 
wrote Edgar Lee Masters, and in both honest work should be rewarded, 
in this world, and not in the next. Masters attacked the cult of literary 
fame as a subterfuge to deny the author his legitimate place among the 
self-sustaining professions. "Literature is a profession and writers must 
live," wrote Masters, "not one-tenth of us will be remembered a hundred 
years hence. The present is ours—the future is the world's." Similarly, 
Jack London saw the distinction between fame and money in terms of 
those authors who write because they have a message for the world, and 
those who write to meet the "belly need." London, in characteristically 
hardboiled fashion, scorned the first as pansies and cast his lot resolutely 
with the second, who were concerned with the tangible, pleasurable, 
things in life.45 
Writing in 1901, Frank Norris heartily accepted the commercial con­
ventions of the writing and publishing professions. In a series of articles 
for the Boston Evening Transcript Norris drew on his experience as a 
reporter, a writer for McClure's magazine and a reader for Doubleday, 
Page to describe with great relish the commercial mechanisms of the 
industry. Norris equated his frank interest in literature as a business 
with an attack on the aesthetic or gentleman scholar, both of whom would 
supposedly greet with horror any association of art with cash. To Frank 
Norris, whose literary credo identified life with literature, the business 
affairs of an author were an inevitable product of his participation in the 
world of men outside his study, and were as much a matter of legitimate 
interest as the life activities of any group.46 
In many ways William Dean Howells bridged the gap between the 
disdain such men as Higginson, Alden and Holt felt for the association 
of money and literature, and the hearty acceptance of commercialism by 
the new professionals. Furthermore, Howells' analysis was by far the 
most sophisticated in terms of the problems of the creative artist in a 
capitalist society. When Howells wrote his essay "Man of Letters as a 
Man of Business" his disenchantment with American society was fresh 
after the "judicial murder" of the Chicago anarchists and the editor's 
enthusiastic reception of Edward Bellamy's Looking Backward, a book 
which was at once a harsh Christian critique of America and a program 
for its salvation. Furthermore, Howells had just resigned as editor of 
Cosmopolitan magazine after he found the high pressure methods of his 
co-editor John Brisben Walker intolerable.47 
Howells accepted the genteel verity that there is something profane, 
48 
 even dishonorable, in a writer's exchange of money for his art. Art, said 
Howells, should be a man's privilege and its results free to all, but the 
"grotesque confusion of our economic being" reduces all the finer things 
in life to their cash basis, and artists, like other tradesmen, are forced to 
barter even the most "mystical messages of their genius" for their daily 
bread. "Writers submitted to the conditions which none can escape," 
Howells wrote, "but that does not justify the conditions, which are none 
the less the conditions of hucksters because they are imposed upon 
poets."48 
William Dean Howells was no Marxist, but his critique of American 
society was sufficiently advanced to enable him to recognize that the reason 
artists were forced to choose between fame and money lay in the demands 
of a highly stratified capitalist economy. Like all workers the artist was 
the producer of a commodity, which like other products of labor was 
disproportionately consumed by a small upper class. The writer's true 
market consisted of the masses but they were deaf to all but his coarsest 
work, whereas the classes found the artist amusing but essentially irrel­
evant to their money-making concerns. The social and economic 
inequalities of our society had created the cultural distance between the 
writer and his true audience. Writing in 1893, Howells hoped American 
authorship was entering a period of transition, one reflecting an expectant 
transformation of the American plutocracy into some higher and more 
altruistic order.49 
But to writers such as Norris, Masters and London the rejection of the 
duality of fame and money, of popularity and culture was an acceptance 
of the new conditions of the literary market in the 1890s. By frankly 
insisting that an author, as a professional, was expected to earn a living 
wage, and that a fairly good indication of the quality of his work rested 
upon his earnings, these authors helped break down the artificial 
distinctions between popularity and literary reputation that had gained 
such a foothold in American cultural life since the early nineteenth 
century. 
To give shape to the new professional attitudes of many American 
authors, two institutions arose during these years designed to defend the 
writer's interests in the literary marketplace. The first of these institu­
tions, the author's society, was ineffectual; the second, the literary agent, 
had a permanent impact upon the relationship of authors to the public 
and their publishers. 
Of some influence on American writers in the 1890s was the formation 
in England of the Society of Authors, established in 1887. The society 
was organized by Walter Besant, a popular sentimental Victorian novelist, 
and it immediately launched a public campaign against publishers based 
upon the accusation of outright fraud on their behalf. These accusations 
were never fully proven but Besant's organization successfully publicized 
the rights of English authors and helped create the same self-consciousness 
49 
 on the American side of the Atlantic.50 Like Edgar Lee Masters, Walter 
Besant sought to place literature on the same professional basis as the 
ancient disciplines of theology, medicine and law and with the new 
professions of science and engineering. Besant's essay, "The Art of 
Fiction/' so effectively criticized by Henry James, was merely the attempt 
to assign to the literary guild the same techniques and rules he thought 
he saw operating in the learned professions he so envied. "Fiction like 
other arts," declared Besant, "is governed and directed by general laws 
which may be laid down with as much precision and exactness as the 
laws of harmony, perspective, and proportion."51 And if fiction writing 
was a profession then its practitioners should be accorded the same 
rewards as other honored servants of the crown; titles, monetary prizes 
and a royal society. 
The formation of an American society of authors stemmed directly 
from Walter Besant's articles in an 1892 issue of Forum—describing 
in glowing terms the English Society's work on behalf of its members. 
Popular historian Charles Burr Todd worked with Besant to found an 
American Society based on the aggressive principles of the English group. 
However, the society quickly degenerated into a social rather than 
political and literary organization and faded in the late 1890s. Not until 
1912 did the Author's League of America, a major organization for writers 
to this day, establish itself after recent legal action had threatened the 
author's ownership of the dramatic and movie rights to his work. The 
protection of these secondary but lucrative markets became the League's 
most important function.52 
The complexity of the literary market in the 1890s, the increasing 
sums involved, and the tensions between authors and publishers (whether 
well-founded or not) all gave rise to the most effective institution of 
authorial professionalism—the literary agent. Initially anoymous literary 
bureaus assumed some of the essential functions of the literary agent—the 
actual marketing of literary property and the protection of authors' rights. 
As early as 1878, the Athenaeum Bureau of Literature invited correspond­
ence from authors wishing to sell their manuscripts. Founded in 1883, 
the New York Bureau of Literary Revision promised to revise and market 
manuscripts for a fee. In 1887 the Writer's ambitious editor William H. 
Hill set up the Writer's Literary Bureau whose functions precisely defined 
the work later literary agents would perform. "The number of writers 
who know where to find the best market for their productions is exceed­
ingly limited," wrote Hill in his prospectus for the Bureau. "A manu­
script must fit the publication to which it is offered as a glove to the 
hand." According to Hill the bureau's experience insured that each 
article received would be sent immediately to the best possible outlet. 
At first the bureau merely revised and typed manuscripts for a fee and 
advised its clients where their work might be marketed. By 1894, 
50 
 however, the bureau was earning most of its money selling manuscripts 
at a commission of 25 per cent.53 
Perhaps the first true literary agent in America was Paul Revere 
Reynolds who alternated as a representative for English publishers in 
New York and as an author's agent in England. Shortly after the passage 
of the copyright act of 1891 the English firm of Cassalls and Company 
employed Reynolds in New York as their representative. By 1895 he was 
working for English publishers Heineman and Cassalls as well as 
approaching American authors independently. His clients at this time 
included Stephen Crane, Ellen Glasgow and Paul Laurence Dunbar.54 
Crane's letters from England to his agent in New York are a graphic 
example of the uses by which literary agents served their clients. In 
England Crane turned out a variety of literary material; short articles 
for the daily press, stories for the magazine market and his next novel, 
first for serialization and then for publication in book form. All the 
complicated negotiations for their sale Reynolds carried out for Crane, 
while advancing him money when the latter's needs became desperate. 
By the First World War probably a dozen literary agents worked in the 
United States and perhaps twice as many operated in England.55 
American publishers remained unreconciled to the presence of the 
literary agent for many years. They attacked them because of what they 
considered their unreasonable demands upon the profits of the book, 
and because the new institution threatened to destroy the intimate 
creative relationship which most publishers thought existed between 
themselves and their clients. Moreover the literary agent directly con­
travened the canons of trade courtesy. Because agents introduced a 
relatively free market into the buying and selling of literary manuscripts 
publishers viewed them as the quintessence of commercialism. On one 
occasion, when offered a manuscript from the English agent, A. P. Watt, 
Henry Holt shot back, "If the matter is to be made in any sense one of 
competition among publishers, pray spare yourself the trouble of com­
municating with us any further, as we do not enter into competitions."56 
In America the literary agent's primary function was not so much 
the protection of the author from the rapaciousness of his publisher, as 
the rationalization and centralization of the distribution of literary 
property to the several rather distinct markets that were emerging in 
the 1890s. In fulfilling this function as literary clearinghouse the agent 
gave an added dimension of freedom to the professional writer, at the 
very time when editors and publishers were becoming more demanding 
in the requirements they imposed upon their contributors. Thus, while 
authors who worked in one particular market were more constricted in 
their work, they were given a greater choice of markets in which to work. 
The literary agent was the key to this new freedom. By the early 
twentieth century the writing and marketing of much American literature 
51 
 came to resemble in fact the laissez-faire competitive system American 
capitalism resembled only in theory. Ohio Historical Society 
footnotes 
1. William Charvat, The Profession of Authorship in America, 1800-1870 (Columbus, 1968), 
292. 
2. Raymond Williams, Culture and Society, 1780-1950 (New York, 1958), 48. 
3. "The American Scholar" in Stephen Whicher, éd., Selections from Ralph Waldo Emerson 
(Boston, 1957), 73. 
4. William Charvat, Literary Publishing in America, 1790-1850 (Philadelphia, 1959), 43; 
Charvat, Profession of Authorship, 294. 
5. Robert E. Spiller, et al, Literary History of the United States (New York, 1963), 515; 
Charvat, Literary Publishing in America, 62. 
6. Charvat, Profession of Authorship, 295. After the Civil War even this oftimes capricious 
source of authorial income was limited by new civil service reforms such as the Pendleton 
Act of 1883. 
7. Donald Sheehan, This Was Publishing (Bloomington, 1957), 44. 
8. Frank Luther Mott, History of American Magazines, IV (Cambridge, 1957), 20-31; 
Frank L. Tooker, Joys and Tribulations of an Editor (New York, 1923), 226-27. 
9. Henry Mills Alden, Magazine Writing and the New Literature (New York, 1908), 69. 
10. Clara Marburg and Rudolf Marburg, eds., William Dean Howells, Criticism and 
Fiction (New York, 1959), 75. 
11. H. H . Boyesen, "Why we have not Great Novelists," Forum, I I I (February, 1887), 628. 
12. Elmo Scott Watson, A History of Newspaper Syndicates in the United States (Chicago, 
1936), 33-37, 50. Between 1880 and 1900 daily newspaper circulation rose from 3.5 to 15.1 
million. U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times 
to 1970 (Washington, 1976), Par t 2, 810. 
13. S. S. McClure, My Autobiography (New York, 1914), 165-70. 
14. Ibid., 70-90, passim; see also Peter Lyons, Success Story, The Life and Times of S. S. 
McClure (New York, 1963), 66-71. 
15. Lyons, Success Story, 74; Watson, Newspaper Syndicates, 43-47; Edward Bok, American­
ization of Edward Hok (New York, 1921), 106. 
16. McClure, Autobiography, 189; Mott, History of American Magazines, IV, 39. 
17. R. W. Stallman, Stephen Crane: Letters (New York, 1960), 27; Lyons, Success Story, 69-70. 
18. Mott, History of American Magazines, 20. 
19. Ibid., 20; McClure, Autobiography, 207-08; Edward Bok, "Cost of Articles in Magazines," 
Author, I I I (May, 1891), 179. 
20. George Britt, Forty Years—Forty Millions: The Career of Frank Munsey (New York, 
1935), 84-91; Mott, History of American Magazines, 30-35, 39; Lyons, Success Story, 171. 
21. See, for example, the correspondence between McClure and Edward M. House, a 
popular writer on Japanese life. Between 1889 and 1893 McClure's editorial initiative and 
control increased, keeping pace with the rising fees he paid for articles on Japanese topics: 
McClure to House, January 16, November 13, December 11, 1889, April 24, 1893; House to 
McClure, September 21, 1889, Mark Twain Collection, Bancroft Library, University of 
California, Berkeley. 
22. New York Tribune, October 17, 1897, p . 9. 
23. McClure, Autobiography, 245; Lincoln Steffens, Autobiography of Lincoln Steffens, 
(New York, 1931), 358. 
24. William Dean Howells, "Recollections of an Atlantic Editorship," Atlantic Monthly 
(November, 1907), 594-602; Mildred Howells, éd., Life in Letters of William Dean Howells 
(Garden City, 1928), 24. 
25. Ida Tarbell, All in a Day's Work (New York, 1939), 147-50, 152. The series doubled 
McClure's circulation. 
26. Lyons, Success Story, 135. 
27. New York Tribune, October 17, 1897, p . 10. 
28. Steffens, Autobiography, 367-74, passim; McClure, Autobiography, 240. 
29. Steffens, Autobiography, 360-61; Mott, History of American Magazines, 35; Hamlin 
Garland, Roadside Meetings (New York, 1930), 343. 
30. James L. Ford, The Literary Shop (New York, 1899), 299-305. 
31. Sheehan, This was Publishing, 60; Henry Holt, Garrulities of an Octogenarian Editor 
(Boston, 1923), 209. 
32. This argument is repeated ad infinitum. See for example Walter Hines Page, A 
Publisher's Confession (New York, 1905), 65-72; George Haven Putnam, Authors and Publishers, 
52 
 a Manual of Suggestions for Beginners in Literature (New York, 1897), 149-51; and Robert 
Stirling Yard, The Publisher (Boston, 1913), 145. 
33. Sheehan, This was Publishing, 57. 
34. Hellmut Lehmann-Haup, The Book in America (New York, 1951), 321. 
35. Holt, Garrulities, 294; G. H . Putnam, Memories of a Publisher, 1885-1915 (New York, 
1915), 521. 
36. Anonymous, "Archdeacon and the Publishers," Saturday Review, LXX (October 11, 
1890), 413-14. 
37. G. H. Putnam, "Author's Complaints and Publisher's Profits," Forum, XI I (September 
1891), 62-77. 
38. Lyons, Success Story, 153-54; Larzer Ziff, The American 1890's (New York, 1968), 266-67. 
39. Frank Norris, Critic, XL (May 1902), 449. 
40. Writer, I (April and May 1887), 1-70, passim. 
41. A. L. Hanscom, "Method Needed in Literary Work," Writer, I I (March 1888), 84. 
42. C. M. Hammond, "Writing as a Vocation or Avocation," Writer, I I (February 1888), 35. 
43. Thomas Wentworth Higginson, "Business of Authorship," Author, I (March 15, 1889), 
142. Author was a companion magazine to Writer. 
44. Higginson, "Pains of Authorship," Author, I (July, 1889), 79. Under a new title this 
is more of Higginson's speech at Harvard. 
45. Edgar Lee Masters, "Writing for Fame and for Gain," Writer, IV (December, 1890), 
267-68; Jack London, " T h e Material Side," Occident (December, 1916), 139, reprinted from 
1899 Editor, Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley. 
46. Donald Pizer, éd., The Literary Criticism of Frank Norris (Austin, 1974), 135-37. 
47. Clare Marburg Kirk, W. D. Howells and Art in His Time (New Brunswick, 1965), 185-97; 
Kirk, W. D. Howells, Traveler from Altruria (New Brunswick, 1962), 50-52. 
48. William Dean Howells, Literature and Life (New York, 1902), 1, 3. Howells' "Man of 
Letters as a Man of Business" was originally published in Scribner's in 1893. 
49. Ibid., 34-35. 
50. Walter Besant, The Pen and the Book (London, 1889), 1-82, passim; Anonymous, "Authors 
and Publishers," Saturday Review, LXII I (March 5, 1887), 645. The author's society might 
have had some basis for their allegations because English publishers traditionally worked upon 
the half profit system in which both profits and expenses were shared equally by publisher and 
author. Publishers often charged against the author's account many of the fixed overhead 
costs of business. 
51. Besant, The Art of Fiction (London, 1902), 6, originally prepared as a lecture delivered 
at the Royal Institution, April 25, 1884. 
52. Besant, "Literature as a Career," Forum, X I I I (August, 1892), 693-708; James Hepburn, 
The Author's Empty Purse and the Rise of the Literary Agent (London, 1968), 68-72; Garland, 
My Friendly Contemporaries (New York, 1932), 34. 
53. Hugo Erichsen, Methods of Authors (Boston, 1894). Prospectus for Writer's Literary 
Bureau is found in unnumbered pages of book. Other early "how to" books include Arnold 
Bainton, The Art of Authorship (New York, 1890) and Gelett Burgess, éd., My Maiden Effort, 
Personal Confessions of Well Known American Authors (Garden City, 1921). Burgess' collection 
of reminiscences was written for the Author's Society. 
54. Hepburn, Author's Empty Purse, 73-74. 
55. Cabled Crane from Cuba, "For Christ Sake, get me some money here quick by cable", 
Stallman, Crane, 144-46; Hepburn, Author's Empty Purse, 80. 
56. Sheehan, This Was Publishing, 57. Those American publishers who were well established 
before the turn of the century usually devoted a few critical pages in their memoirs to the 
literary agent, who, they claimed, had contributed to the "commercialization of l i terature" 
since their retirement from active service. Those publishers who got their start after 1900 
and continued their work into the 1920s and 1930s are far less hostile to the agent idea. 
Examples of the former are Page, Confessions; Putnam, Memories; and Holt, Garrulities. 
Among the latter type are George H. Doran, Chronicles of Barabbas (New York, 1935) and 
Roger Burlingame, Of Making Many Books (New York, 1946). 
53 
