When the editorial board oi American Studies was approached 
with the idea of issuing a festschrift for Alexander Kern, the response 
was uniformly enthusiastic. Alex s spirit, his wide-ranging interests, 
his enthusiasm and his tolerance for diverse approaches have had a 
good deal to do with the health and vitality of our field. He has, 
moreover, been a warm friend to this journal from its early days. 
To its editor, too: the work connected with producing this issue 
has had a personal, special and pleasantly unprofessional feeling. 
That some of the authors who sent in contributions are scholars I 
know and like—a favorite professor from my own undergraduate days, 
a favorite colleague from a school where I was twice visiting 
professor—was in part responsible for that feeling. So was seeing Alex: 
it happened that during the two years in which this issue has been 
in progress I had occasion to spend three separate days with him, 
twice with my family along, and once with Jean there, too. These 
happy times give me now an even better sense of the reasons for 
the esteem and affection of his own colleagues and students. 
The tribute to Alex, then, comes not merely from people who know 
him at Iowa, but from his friends in MASA and at Kansas, too. 
The editorial board and the Iowa instigators decided not to follow 
the usual festschrift procedure in which colleagues and students 
of the person to be honored are each asked to submit a paper which 
is then published as part of a book. Too often, alas, the volume is 
leaden, the dead weight borne by the university press or monograph 
series which was shamed into producing it. The expense of 
production is invariably too high, and the edition runs to just a 
few copies: practically nohody outside the circle of contributors, 
immediate friends and family will buy it, because it is not about 
anything in particular and because the quality of contributions is 
uneven. Librarians hesitate to order it; the contents defy efficient 
cataloguing. Inadequately covered by indexing and abstracting 
services—which are set up to handle, on the one hand, "real" books by 
a single author or a closely collaborating group of co-authors, and, 
5 
 on the other, magazines which are understood to carry a diverse range 
oi articles—the festschrift accumulates a patina of dust on the shelves 
oi the iew libraries which purchased it. No, the editors decided, 
ii we were going into the festschrift business, the articles submitted 
would go through the normal editorial process; they would be papers 
we would print normally in a good general issue of American Studies. 
That would be the best and most appropriate tribute. 
This was, of course, doing things the hard way, but that seems to be 
a speciality of the house. John Cawelti was recruited to serve as 
guest editorial consultant. He and the committee of plotters 
at the University of Iowa made up a list of Alex s students and 
associates who might be approached to contribute papers. Cawelti 
and I then drafted a letter together, making clear the nature of 
the project and its ground-rules. The letter went out from his office, 
and submitted papers came to him for Erst screening. They were 
then shipped to the editorial office, where the contributors7 names, 
academic rank and university affiliations were removed, just as they 
are normally, and the articles sent on their rounds among our 
editorial readers. The members of our editorial board and the other 
scholars consulted, in other words, did not even know—except in 
cases in which internal information gave the gag away—that they were 
reading essays submitted for the Kern festschrift. 
The only rule we bent—and this one just a little—was that 
concerning specialization. We try, generally, not to take papers 
which could be placed in journals in the more traditional disciplines. 
If a piece speaks not to Americanists in general, but primarily to 
students of American literature, or sociology, or whatever, we usually 
say "No" or suggest that the author rethink his work in the light of 
our audience and its interests. Among the list of Alex's students 
and colleagues are some people not familiar with interdisciplinary 
studies, unaccustomed, for instance, to pointing the significance of 
their research to the body of theory and practice which forms the 
community of discourse for scholars in American Studies. 
Good papers of the sort which they produced are familiar enough 
to our editorial board; they are the kind which come back from our 
consultants with comments such as "This is a fine piece of work, 
but it belongs in a journal more specialized than ours." In a couple of 
cases, then, we waived this rule on the theory that Alex s interests 
are catholic, the articles in question were excellent and our readers 
might see implications our consultants did not. As of the 
present writing, we feel no pangs of guilt whatsoever. A foolish 
consistency is the hobgoblin of little journals. 
Because every effort was made to keep this project secret from Alex, 
and because there were official arrangements made at the 
University of Iowa about which we have only secondary information, 
a list of people whose help deserves to be acknowledged is likely 
6 
 to be incomplete. We are aware of the efforts oi Jean Kern, 
Frank Lloyd, Eiic Sandeen, John Gerber, John Clendenning, 
Robert E. Morsberger, Frederick Pratter, John Kern, Ursula Brumm, 
Kay Mussell, James Neatherlin and Amos St. Germain—all of 
whom we thank on Alex s behalf. 
SGL 
"Emerson and Economics," New England Quarterly, XII (1940), 678-696. 
"The Sociology of Knowledge in the Study of Literature," Sewanee Review, 
L (1942), 505-514. 
"American Literature in the Teaching of American History," Mississippi 
Valley Historical Review, XXX (1943), 243-245. 
"Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes Today," University of Kansas City Review, 
XIV (1948), 191-199. 
"The Early Days of the United States of America," in The Hindustan 
Standard, Puja Annual, Calcutta (1950). 
(co-author) Report of the Committee on Trends in Research in American 
Literature, 1940-1950, in James B. Hart, general editor, American 
Literature Group of the Modern Language Association. N.P., 1951. 
"Thoreau Manuscripts at Harvard," Thoreau Society Bulletin, No; 53, 1953. 
"The Rise of Transcendentalism," in H. H. Clark, editor, Transitions in 
American Literary History, Duke University Press, Durham, N.C., 1955. 
"Dreiser's Difficult Beauty," in The Stature of Theodore Dreiser, A. Kazin 
and C. Shapiro, editors, Bloomington, Indiana, 1957. 
"The Dark Side of Emerson's Optimism," Emerson Society Quarterly, No. 
18 (1960), 12-14. 
"A Note on Hawthorne's Juveniles," Philological Quarterly, XXXIX 
(1960), 242-246. 
"American Studies and American Literature: Approaches to the Study of 
Thoreau," College English, XXVII (1966), 480-486. 
(with Marvin Meyers and John Cawelti) Sources of the American Republic, 
2 Volumes, Chicago, 1960-1961, Revised, 1967-1968. 
"Myth and Symbol in Criticism of Faulkner's 'The Bear,' " in Myth and 
Symbol, Bernice Slote, editor, Lincoln, Nebraska, 1963. 
"Thoreau's Sir Walter Raleigh," CE A A Neiosletter, March, 1968. 
Thoreau: Tivo Fragments, Iowa City, Iowa, 1970. 
"Preface" to Huckleberries, by Henry David Thoreau, Iowa City, Iowa, 
1970. 
"Die Soziologie des Wissens in der Literaturwissenschaft," in J. Strelk and 
W. Hinderer editors, Moderne Amerikanische Literatur-Theorien, 
Frankfurt am Mein, 1970. 
"The Sociology of Knowledge in the Study of Literature," in M. C. Albrecht,
J. H. Barnett and Mason Griff, editors, The Sociology of Art 
and Literature: A Reader, New York, 1970. 
"Frost's 'The Wood-Pile,' " The Explicator, XXVIII, 1970. 
"Dreiser and Fitzgerald as Social Critics," Papers of the Midwest Modern 
Language Association, No. 2, 1972. 
"Brook Farm" article, Encyclopedia Britannica, II (1974), 299-300. 
 "English Semester: A Team Taught Course," Speech given to the Iowa 
College Conference on English, Graceland College, Lamoni, Iowa, 
1973. 
Some thirty reviews in such journals as: American Literature, New Eng­
land Quarterly, Mississippi Valley Historical Review, Philological 
Quarterly Western Humanities Review, Criticism, Frontier and Mid­
land. 
evtnéd fa fonoyneà& 
articles accepted for publication 
"Thoreau's Religious Thought: Church, Scripture, Nature and Ethics." 
"Melville's The Confidence Man: A Structure of Satire." 
articles in process 
"Walden As Fiction." 
"The Mind and Art of Henry Thoreau." 
"The Ideology of the American Business Novel Since World War II: A 
Study in Mass and Popular Culture." 
books 
contracted for publication by the Princeton University Press: the new 
Center for Editions of American Authors Thoreau edition, The Com­
plete Works of H. D. Thoreau 
1. Excursions. 
2. In Miscellanies, "Sir Walter Raleigh"; remainder of volume edited by 
E. Moser. 
3. Fruits and Seeds, unpublished manuscripts, with Leo Stoller. 
8 
