ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
Natural Environment and Human Culture: Defining Terms
and Understanding Worldviews
O. F. McIsaac* and M. Brtin
ABSTRACT
The terms nature and natural each have several different meanings,
which can lead to confusion in communications about environmental
issues. One approach to clarifying discussion, frequently used in the
sciences, is to develop precise, operational definitions of terminology.
We argue that this approach can be ineffective when applied to multifaeeted
conceptual terms such as nature, natural, and culture. We
think the range of legitimate meanings for these terms may be better
communicated by historical accounts of use that describe the assumptions,
contexts, and woridviews associated with different interpreta-
tions. These accounts do not resolve disagreement but can help clarify
the basis for it, and open up new avenues of inquiry. In this paper,
we examine the terms nature, natural environment, environmental
change, and environmental degradation. A recent article in this journal
offered precise definitions of the last three of these terms that
were based on the idea that natural is that which is relatively uninfluenced
by human culture. Although this is a commonly accepted mean-
ing of natural, we contend that this meaning needs to be carefully
scrutinized. We identify specific problems with this usage and offer
an account of use of the term nature, which we think provides a more
thorough understanding of how nature and natural have been used
and understood in different contexts. Since the term natural can be
understood several different ways, communication of any particular
meaning requires careful articulation of the intended meaning in light
of several alternative interpretations.
A many different times and in many different places,the natural environment and human culture have
been portrayed as two distinct, if not diametrically opposed,
realms (e.g., McKibben, 1989; Johnson et al.,
1997). This conceptual separation has profoundly influenced
environmental thought and policies. It has been
used to justify wilderness preservation and to portray
human induced environmental changes as unnatural and
undesirable. McKibben (1989) has recently argued that
nature as defined that which is uninfluenced by human
culture has ended because every place on Earth has
been directly or indirectly touched by human culture.
However, there are several reasonable challenges to
this view (Pollan, 1991; Gomez-Pompa nd Kaus, 1992;
Jordan, 1994; Turner, 1994; Cronon, 1995; Pickering,
1996; Potts, 1996). Gomez-Pompa nd Kaus (1992) 
Dep. of Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences, Univ. of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 1102 South Goodwin Ave., Urbana, IL
61801. Received 29 Dec. 1997. *Corresponding author (gmcisaac@
uiuc.edu).
Published in J. Environ. Qual. 28:1-10 (1999).
gue that the culture/nature dichotomy is part of a
worldview that is not scientifically justifiable and leads
to biased and unwise environmental policy and management.
For instance, the designation and management of
wilderness areas that excluded habitation by indigenous
peoples in the southwestern USA may have contributed
to declines in the diversity of native species that had
been enhanced or maintained by human activities for
many centuries (Nabhan, 1982, 1997).
The critics of the conventional nature/culture dichotomy
do not deny that some humans have caused exten-
sive and undesirable impacts on the environment.
Rather, they view and describe such impacts from different
philosophic and/or scientific perspectives. For in-
stance, some of these critics point out that practically
every species modifies the environment to some degree,
and that human-induced modifications can be seen as
the most recent episode in an ongoing process of environmental
change (Turner, 1994; Potts, 1996). Accor-
ding to this view, human culture is a product of natural
processes and therefore can be considered as natural as
the behavior of any other species.
On the surface, the debate about whether human
culture is natural or not may appear to be exclusively
about semantics and definitions. Underlying the semantics,
however, is a debate about legitimate and logically
consistent ways to view human activities with respect
to the rest of the natural world. Different views may
lead to very different attitudes, environmental policies,
and practices. If we believe that human culture is unnatural,
then practically any human intervention in the
environment may be seen as a process of degradation
of the pristine. This view has been dominant in this
century and has guided a "hands-off" policy toward the
maintenance of wilderness and natural areas.
If, on the other hand, we include human culture within
nature, then human interactions with the environment
may be considered part of a natural evolutionary process.
This view has been used to justify active manage-
ment of natural areas and ecological restoration efforts
(Packard, 1990, 1993; Jordan, 1994; Turner, 1994). Some
Native American and nonwestern cultures appear to
have less dichotomous views of culture and nature that
allow for various degrees of integration of human culture
into the natural environment (Nabhan, 1982, 1997;
Gomez-Pampa nd Kaus, 1992). Such views can be justified
based on current evolutionary theory (Potts, 1996)
and provide a basis for acceptance of creative interacPublished
January, 1999
 2 J. ENVIRON. QUAL., VOL. 28, JANUARY-FEBRUARY 1999
tions between humans and the natural world. But these
views are clearly incompatible with those that insist on
a strict dichotomy between nature and culture.
The terms nature and culture refer to broad conceptual
categories that are subject to a variety of interpreta-
tions. The language frequently used to discuss environmental
issues, however, seems to be heavily influenced
by the view that portrays human culture as categorically
distinct from nature. An example of this is provided by
an article by Johnson et al. (1997) that offered definitions
for the terms natural environment, environmental
change, and environmental degradation. These authors
tried to remove ambiguity from these terms by defining
them precisely, or in our terms, operationally. Their
definitions rely on the commonly held view that separates
human culture from the natural environment. They
offer a justification for this view, but we find this to
be debatable and the resulting lexicon leads to some
confusion and contradiction. In this paper, we examine
definitions of four environmental terms: natural environment,
environmental change, environmental degrada-
tion, and nature. We consider the strengths and weaknesses
of the definitions of the first three terms that
were proposed by Johnson et al. (1997). Unlike Johnson
et al., we do not consider the commonly held view that
segregates human culture from that which is natural as
the only reasonable way to understand and describe the
natural environment. Since the term natural is derived
from the term nature, we think it is appropriate that
environmental terms be defined in the context of our
ideas about nature. Thus, in addition to the terms defined
by Johnson et al., we also examine a variety of
ways in which the term nature has been used.
In order to set the stage for this examination of definitions,
we make some general points about different ap-
proaches to formulating definitions and understanding
the meaning of terms. We distinguish between two types
of definition: operational and accounts of use. We argue
that broad conceptual terms, such as nature and culture,
that have long histories of different uses are probably
best understood by "accounts of use" which recount
the ways in which the term has been used in different
contexts. The different meanings assigned to a particular
term are frequently associated with different paradigmatic
perspectives, or worldviews. Forcing such mul-
tifaceted terms into precise operational definitions may
lead to dissatisfaction and/or confusion if the operational
definition does not communicate the full range
of legitimate meanings currently associated with a term.
We illustrate this point by thoroughly examining the
definition of natural environment proposed by Johnson
et al. and by providing a partial account of use for the
term nature.
In a concluding discussion, we examine the implications
of abandoning the distinction between human cul-
ture and nature. We conclude that dissolving this longstanding
distinction does not mean that everything hu-
mans do is necessarily good and acceptable. More specific
terminology and lines of argument are available to
debate the acceptability of various human behaviors
and the resulting environmental consequences.
DIFFERENT APPROACHES TO
COMMUNICATING THE MEANING
OF TERMS
Much of the recent debate about our concepts about nature
and human culture has taken place in scholarly venues, characterized
by heightened attention to definition of terms. When
done carefully and fairly, efforts to define terms can help us
escape traps due to clich6, conflation, and misunderstanding.
They can also raise awareness about different ways of viewing
the subject being defined. However, it is important to recognize
that there are different approaches to specifying and
clarifying the meaning of terms.
A term can be defined in a functional manner, referring to
objects and processes with precisely describable properties,
much as one would explain the meaning of a computer command
in terms of what it does. This is frequently attempted
in legal, commercial, and engineering discourse, as well as in
scientific work-wherever the goal is to construct a mechanism
for analysis, action, or decision making. We call this an operational
definition. For many terms operational definitions are
appropriate. Lack of controversy is perhaps the best indicator
of appropriateness. When there is controversy, multiple meanings,
or when the definition takes on the appearance of legisla-
tion, a single precise operational definition may be inappropriate
or impossible. Controversy frequently surrounds terms
that have broad conceptual meanings or histories of multiple
meanings.
The meaning or meanings of a term can also be clarified
by recounting a history of its development and use. This etymological,
philological approach is common i the humanities,
but only reluctantly used in the sciences. We call it an "account
of use". This approach seems more appropriate when dealing
with broad concepts, such as nature, that have a long history
of different operational uses. In addition to listing previous
operational definitions of a term, accounts of use can also
describe the paradigmatic contexts (i.e., worldviews) in which
different meanings were understood as well as implicit nuances
and controversies surrounding the terms. This helps us understand
what people had in mind when they used the term, and
it can provide interesting grounds for further inquiry that
builds upon the past rather than ignoring or repeating it.
Precise operational definitions provide a foundation for
conducting precise scientific, engineering, and legal work.
However, this work often occurs in the pursuit of goals that
do not lend themselves to operational definitions. Science
seeks to establish truth, engineering seeks to enhance efficiency
and control, law seeks to promote justice. The general
meanings of these broad goals-truth, efficiency, control, justice-are
subjects of debate and are probably better understood
by accounts of use rather than precise operational definitions.
But, to make progress for a particular project, these goals
usually need to be operationally defined. Although useful and
practical in some settings, such particular operational definitions
are often inappropriate in other settings and, therefore,
they are not appropriate as general or standard definitions
for the terms. Nevertheless, familiarity with the various ways
that these terms have been used (i.e., account of use) can aid
communication within various professions, across professions
and with the general public. Additionally, these terms are
sometimes involved in controversies that can lead to the formulation
of specific research questions. The research that
these terms motivate can give rise to increasingly precise and
operational understandings.
Johnson et al. (1997) recently proposed definitions for several
environmental terms. We think that their definition of
natural environment is an illustration of problems that can
 MclSAAC & BR~IN: NATURAL ENVIRONMENT AND HUMAN CULTURE 3
arise when a precise operational definition is imposed upon
a term that can be legitimately defined several different ways.
Whereas Johnson et al. accept one common use of the term
natural as the most relevant for environmental issues, we think
that both natural and nature have been and can be legitimately
interpreted in several different ways with respect to humans
and the environment. We explore such interpretations in our
analysis of Johnson et al.’s definition of natural environment
and then in a partial account of use of the term nature.
We note, however, that in developing a definition of environmental
degradation, Johnson et al. consider a variety of
ways in which the term degradation has been used in environmental
contexts. From this account of use, they arrive at a
definition that we think is more broadly considered and generally
acceptable.
HOW HAS NATURAL BEEN DEFINED?
Much effort and interest has been directed toward understanding
and preserving the natural environment. But what
do people mean when they use the term natural environment?
According to Webster’ s New World Dictionary of the America
Language, natural can be defined in several ways: "1) of or
arising from nature 2) produced or existing in nature; not
artificial 3) dealing with nature... 4) as found in nature; unaltered
by man... 5) real or physical rather than spiritual, intellec-
tual, or imaginary 6) innate; inborn... 7) based on an instinctive
moral feeling... 8) true to nature; lifelike... 9) normal 
usual..." William Cronon (1995) observes that sometimes natural
is used to indicate a normal or inevitable outcome of a
process (based on several of the meanings above) and other
times it is used to indicate a desirable outcome or state (based
on meaning 7). In environmental discussions, these two meanings
are sometimes conflated.
In developing a definition of natural environment, Johnson
et al. (1997) observe that in environmental contexts, natural
"almost always means that which is neither made, changed,
or otherwise affected by humans." They provide some justification
for adopting this view, which we shall address later.
Ideally, according to Johnson et al., a natural environment
would be completely uninfluenced by humans, but they realize
that such environments may no longer exist. They define natural
environment as "one that is relatively unchanged or unaf-
fected by human culture." Technology seems to represent
culture for them. They state that urination in the woods is
natural, even if humans do it; but it is not natural to light
forests with a match or chop them down with an ax. Their
use is essentially consistent with the meanings 2 and 4 of
natural quoted from the New Word Dictionary (above), although
this dictionary refers to "man" not "human culture."
Johnson et al. observe that "...our species [homo sapiens]
is part of nature and a product of organic evolution..." but
our advanced material culture is not natural. If, however, our
species is part of nature, then it seems logical and reasonable
to also conclude that anything we make or do is also "of or
arising from nature" or natural, according to the first definition
in the New Word Dictionary. But this would contradict meaning
4 "unaltered by man." An examination of the root term,
nature, confirms an ambiguity regarding the application of the
term nature to humans. According to Williams (1985) nature
may refer to the essential character of a single thing; to the
entire material world excluding humans; or to the entire material
world including humans (Williams, 1985; Evernden, 1992).
Whether humans or their culture are part of nature or
distinct from nature has been a key debate in the struggle to
define nature and the natural environment with environmentalists,
scientists, philosophers, historians, religious authorities,
animal rights or welfare advocates, and others involved. Four
recent collections of essays (Baldwin et al., 1994; Cronon,
1995; Soule and Lease, 1995; Ellen, 1996) are contributions to
this debate, which does not appear to have reached a decisive
outcome. For instance, at the conclusion of a collection of
essays on this subject, Cronon (1995) observed: "If there is 
moral to this book, it is that we need to think much harder
about what we mean when we use the word ’nature’ and about
how we should and should not draw boundaries between the
things we call ’human’ and the things we call ’natural’." Johnson
et al. do not refer to any of these works that explore a
variety of perspectives about the meaning of the term nature
and its complicated relation to human culture. Rather, they
produce a concise operational definition of natural environment
by offering justifications for a common use of the term
natural in environmental contexts. We shall attempt to show
how and why this use becomes problematic. In the two following
sections we critique the definitions and justifications of-
fered by Johnson et al; and in the section thereafter we give
an account of use to demonstrate this approach to understanding
the meaning of words and to further demonstrate the
variety of ways in which nature has been understood in relation
to human culture.
Is Human Culture Unnatural?
Johnson et al. (1997) argue that humans are natural, having
evolved like other animals, but our advanced material culture
and its environmental impacts are not natural. They offer
three justifications for this view. First, no other species has
advanced material culture. Second, advanced culture allows
humans to circumvent population controls to which other lifeforms
are subject. Lastly, while other species have coevolved
gradually with their environment, humans evolve in their environment
in a way that disrupts it extensively and rapidly.
The last of these justifications appears to be the most important,
but let us consider each in turn. The first justification,
that advanced material culture is unique to one species, humans,
seems reasonable until we consider that all species have
at least one unique feature; otherwise they could not be identified
as separate species. If unnatural is taken to mean unique
or unusual (which is one standard use of the word) then any
distinguishing feature could be singled out as unnatural, and
humans would not necessarily be alone in this category.
How about the second justification, that humans circumvent
population controls effective for other species? Humans are
not alone in either circumventing population controls or experiencing
episodes of rapid population growth. Many species
have a capacity for rapid population growth. Short-term variations
in weather, long-term climatic shifts, and evolutionary
adaptations (physiological, chemical, or behavioral) occasionally
give competitive advantage to some species over others.
This consequently modifies or circumvents previously existing
population control mechanisms and can result in significant
changes in population size. For instance, Bennett (1997) reported
that the abundance of several plant species grew expo-
nentially for hundreds of years following the retreat of the
glaciers in the early Holocene.
A growing population will eventually experience limitations
of resources and/or increasing mortality due to predation or
parasitism which may lead to either a new steady-state population
level (carrying capacity) or a population decline. Increas-
ing to a new steady state is a growth pattern observed for
other species colonizing new resources and habitats and is
known as logistic growth (Clapham, 1983). Alternatively, 
the case of an outbreak, a population may decrease in size as
rapidly as it had increased. The human population has been
 4 J. ENVIRON. QUAL., VOL. 28, JANUARY-FEBRUARY 1999
growing exponentially for several centuries, but this growth
rate has been decreasing during the last few decades. If this
declining growth rate continues and humans achieve a steadystate
population, then global human population growth will
approach the logistic growth pattern that has been observed
for other species.
Not all population growth is logistic, however. Rapid increases
in abundance followed by equally rapid decline has
been observed for locusts (Locusta migratoria), lemmings
( Lemmus lemmus ), spruce budworms ( Choristoneura fumiferana),
moose (Alces alces), and other species even when human
influence has not been significant (Clapham, 1983; Botkin,
1990; Myers, 1993; McLaren and Peterson, 1994; Bakersville,
1995). Humans are also subject to such declines as have occurred
during famines, war, and disease epidemics. A very
dramatic decline occurred during the Bubonic Plague epidemic
in Europe. Similar disease epidemics and population
declines in the future are possible.
Humans have circumvented or delayed population control
mechanisms by developing various defense mechanisms, especially
behavioral adaptations such as the development of scien-
tific methodologies applied to medicine and agriculture. We
(humans) have been able to make such adaptations because,
among other reasons, we possess large brains and manual
dexterity which are products of evolution. We use these advantages
to do what all other species attempt to do: survive and
reproduce. Humans are not unusual in either circumventing
population control mechanisms or in experiencing exponential
population growth. To be consistent we must either refer to
all, not just human, circumvention of population control mechanisms
as unnatural, or else abandon this as a justification for
considering human culture as uniquely unnatural.
Johnson et al.’s last justification is that humans change the
environment most drastically and rapidly while other species
coevolve gradually with their environment. Although there
may be some room for debate on this point, it is probably
true that homo sapiens have transformed the environment far
more extensively and rapidly than any other single species.
Other species and groups of species have had a profound
impact on the environment. For instance, the global environment
has been drastically transformed by the vast number of
photosynthesizing species that have added molecular oxygen
to the atmosphere, but this was a consequence of many species
acting over a very long period. Some species have a disproportionately
large influence on the ecosystems they inhabit and
are considered keystone species. Humans appear to have become
a keystone species at the global scale, which is unusual
and for that reason humans could be considered unnatural.
If, however, extent and speed of environmental change
are the criteria for defining what is unnatural, then human
modifications of the environment may not be unique in this
regard if we consider abiotic agents of rapid and extensive
environmental change. Meteors striking the Earth seem to
have the potential to cause more rapid and more extensive
environmental change than humans. A meteor may have been
responsible for the mass extinction event that occurred 64
million years ago. But, after defining natural environment,
Johnson et al. specifically state that meteorite strikes are natural
because natural has been defined as "relatively unchanged
or undisturbed by human culture." It is circular logic to claim
that this definition is justified because humans have changed
the environment rapidly and extensively, and then to disqualify
other agents of rapid and extensive environmental change
from being considered unnatural because they are not human.
Both the pace of human-induced modifications to the environment
as compared with other agents of environmental
change and the evolutionary significance of that pace are debatable.
Since Darwin, scientists and the public have generally
visualized evolution as gradual; but this has been challenged
in recent decades by Gould and Eldredge (1977) and others
who see evolution as a series of punctuated equilibria. Species
may appear and disappear quickly, while persisting largely
unchanged for a relatively long time. The fossil record provides
evidence for both gradualism and punctuated equilibria, so
evolution may be gradual in some settings and/or for some
species and punctuated in others (Ridley, 1993; Bennett, 1997).
As stated previously, Bennett (1997) reported that several
plant species expanded their numbers exponentially following
the retreat of the glaciers in the early Holocene. This rate of
expansion was detected in relatively recent pollen deposits
that provided a much finer temporal resolution than the rest
of the fossil record generally provides. Similarly rapid shifts
in populations and ecosystems may have occurred in the past
but are more difficult to detect in the coarser fossil record of
the more distant past.
We do not deny that human cultures have been and are
expanding and changing the environment more rapidly than
most species have evolved. However, as Turner (1994) argues,
if we bear in mind that the pace of evolution has been variable
among species and over time, then human modifications of
the environment do not seem so unusual. The history of life
on Earth has been one of on-going modification of the environment
and the pace of that modification appears to be increas-
ing with time (Botkin, 1990; Benton, 1995). The apparent
success of the human species (as judged by numbers of individuals)
indicates that there has been recent selective pressure
that favors species capable of rapid adaptation and that humans
have successfully responded to this pressure. Whether
we will continue to be successful is an open question, as it is
with any other species.
As for the lack of coevolution of human culture with its
environment, some authors see a coevolutionary relation between
them (Nabhan, 1982; Gliessman, 1989; Potts, 1996).
Stephen Gliessman (1989) states that "agricultural systems
develop as a result of the coevolution that occurs between
culture and the environment..." (p. 369). New varieties 
crops, livestock, pests and diseases; the naturalization of existing
species to new environments through human agency;
and new human behaviors responding to these changing environmental
factors can all be construed as evidence of coevo-
lution.
Richard Potts (1996) interprets the archeological record 
challenge the conventional separation of culture and nature.
He argues that humans evolved during a particularly turbulent
climatic period. Tool building, social organization, and symbolic
thought can be viewed as successful adaptations to cope
with a turbulent environment. Hominids less capable of using
these innovations became extinct. "Our pivotal finding is that,
rather than being against nature, our apparent dominion is
based on actions that echo and amplify the kinds of natural
alteration that led to the origin of humans in the first place.
The supposed conflict between man and nature...crumbles in
the new grasp of how mankind has evolved." (p. 253) According
to Potts (1996) and Bennett (1997), past interpreta-
tions of the evolutionary record focused attention on competition
among species as the main driver of natural selection
rather than on climatic or other environmental factors. Scientists
had previously assumed that the degree of climatic varia-
tion observed in recorded human history was representative
of the long-term past. But new techniques developed to infer
prehistorical climates and have quantified a greater degree of
climatic variability than previously assumed. This variability
appears to have been a stronger force for selection than previously
suspected. Hence, the human responses to this climatic
 MclSAAC & BRON: NATURAL ENVIRONMENT AND HUMAN CULTURE 5
variation can be seen as similar to the evolutionary innovations
of other species.
Even if human culture has had the greatest and most rapid
environmental impact, assuming unambiguous size and rate
comparisons are possible, we are back to the uniqueness issue
discussed above. Why not consider the second largest impact
unnatural as well? Moreover, if degree and rate of environmental
change are the justification for classifying as unnatural
the environmental impacts of advanced material culture, then
why not define specific magnitudes and rates of change as
unnatural regardless of the cause? But, the definition of Johnson
et at. focuses on one causative agent (human culture)
rather than unnatural rates or extents of environmental
change. Thus, according to their definition a fire caused by a
bolt of lightning is always natural, whereas a fire started by
a human would always be unnatural regardless of its extent
and rate of environmental impact relative to the natural fire.
This seems inconsistent with the justification that human culture
and/or its environmental impacts are unnatural because
of the rates and magnitude of the environmental change involved.
We agree with Johnson et al. that human culture is unusual,
and has often been a locus of rapid environmental change.
But because human culture has arisen from natural processes
and because there are nonhuman agents of rapid and extensive
environmental change, we think that it is debatable whether
human culture and/or its environmental impacts should be
classified as either unnatural or uniquely unnatural.
Without such an unambiguous designation of natural, we
cannot unambiguously distinguish natural environment from
simply environment. North American wilderness areas might
be considered examples of the natural environment according
to Johnson et al. because these areas appear to be relatively
unaffected by human culture. But, Callicott (1991), Pollan
(1991), Gomez-Pompa and Kaus (1992), Soule (1995), 
Cronon (1995) all critique the notion of wilderness as pristine,
and untouched by humans. The idea, they argue, is based
largely on religious and/or urban myths, and underestimates
the influence of Native Americans had in shaping American
ecosystems that European settlers later claimed.
Judge Potter Stewart of the U.S. Supreme Court knew how
difficult it can be to construct an operational definition for a
concept that is open to a variety of interpretations. In a court
case that examined restrictions on freedom of expression in the
name of public decency, he offered the following operational
definition of pornography: "I know it when I see it." Can we
do even that well with natural environment?
Environmental Change or Degradation?
Shifting from states to processes, Johnson et al. define environmental
change as "change or disturbance of environment
through natural ecological processes," adding that "Environmental
change by natural processes has characterized the evo-
lution of the earth since its beginning..." Any change caused
by humans, especially any cause of sufficient scale traceable
to human civilization, is not environmental change, because
it is unnatural.
In a volume titled Global Environmental Change: Understanding
the Human Dimensions, the National Research Coun-
cil (1992) used environmental change with the most literal
possible interpretation you can arrive at from combining environmental
and change: alteration of the environment whether
or not it was caused by humans. Johnson et al. want their
definitions to capture current usage, be easily understood, and
improve communication. National Research Council’s usage
seems more in line with these criteria than Johnson et al.’s
definition. Of course, one could subdivide environmental
change into natural environmental change and environmental
change induced by human civilization, but only to face the
problems dealt with above, in the previous section.
In defining environmental degradation, Johnson et al. use
an account of use approach in that they consider a variety of
uses of the term degradation in environmental contexts. They
observe, for instance, that the eruption of Mount St. Helens
might be viewed as an immediate landscape degradation by
the timber industry, and it also could be considered a renewing
and evolutionary event to ecologists and foresters with longer
time frames. They also observe that when degradation is used
in scientific and popular environmental literature, it is almost
always linked to artificial change or disturbance by humans.
Johnson et al. argue that the term environmental degradation
would adequately describe most, but not all, change or
disturbance to the environment caused by human civilization.
The Great Wall of China, the Egyptian Pyramids, the Sydney
Opera House were all changes, all caused environmental disturbances,
but the authors are reluctant to call their construc-
tion and maintenance environmental degradation. In order to
exempt these apparently treasured human artifacts, they define
environmental degradation as "any change or disturbance
to the environment that is perceived to be deleterious or
undesirable." They also suggest the context in which the term
is used be always made explicit.
We accept their definition because it is a simple and logical
combination of the current definitions of environment and
degradation and is open to a variety of legitimate interpretations.
However, we find some lack of clarity and a possible
contradiction in the way they developed and justified this
definition. Johnson et al. indicate that they initially favored
an interpretation which portrayed any human-induced change
as environmental degradation, and that this definition would
"cover most cases." But for reasons that we think are not
clearly articulated, they decided that it was unacceptable to
"indict our arts, our architecture, our sciences and most of
our human endeavors and institutions." It seems inconsistent
to argue that all human interventions in the environment constitute
deviations from the natural condition and that most of
these could be considered environmental degradation by virtue
of the deviation from the natural condition, but that some
can be exempted from such indictment in spite of the deviation
from the so-called natural condition. This inconsistency seems
to have led Johnson et al. to develop a more general definition
of environmental degradation, but not to question the premise
that led to the contradiction.
If, on the other hand, we consider human culture to be
part of the natural environment, then there is no reason to
automatically indict most or all human activities as environmental
degradation and, consequently, there is no need to
grant exemptions to arts, architecture, etc. We could, nonetheless,
consider certain human actions as environmental degra-
dation because of the speed or extent of ecological change
they cause or because of other perceived undesirable and
deleterious changes in the environment, as the definition of
Johnson et al. allows.
A PARTIAL ACCOUNT OF USE
OF THE TERM NATURE
We agree with Johnson et al. that natural is now commonly
used to signify that which is uninfluenced by human culture
and that this meaning is frequently used or assumed in discussions
of environmental issues. However, we think this usage
needs to be scrutinized because the distinctions drawn between
human culture and the rest of nature, and between human
 6 J. ENVIRON. QUAL., VOL. 28, JANUARY-FEBRUARY 1999
culture and other agents of environmental change are based
on debatable premises or are inconsistently applied. Furthermore,
the idea that humans and/or their culture are unnatural
has very deep and extensive historical, cultural, and religious
roots that have been subject to many different interpretations
and debates. These debates about whether human culture is
natural or unnatural revolve around different ideas about what
we think nature is. Rather than attempting to decide the outcome
of the very long-standing nature/culture debate by creat-
ing an operational definition that reflects one currently popular
view, we think it is more important to elucidate the various
points of view that have motivated this debate. To this end,
we offer a partial account of use of the term nature.
Our account will be relatively brief and incomplete, intended
partly to illustrate some previous attempts to contrast
or associate nature with culture and partly to illustrate this
approach to understanding and defining. The very long entry
under nature in the Oxford English Dictionary shows what an
all-encompassing account of use is like. However, we should
bear in mind that this length is partly a reflection of particular
characteristics of the term nature. Williams (1985) observed
that "nature is perhaps the most complex word in the language"
and that "any full history of the uses of nature would
be a history of a large part of human thought."
The earliest uses of the term nature (dating from the 13th
Century) referred to the essential characteristics of particular
items. Since the 14th Century it was used to refer to an "inherent
force which directs either the world, or humans beings,
or both" (Williams, 1985). Since the 17th Century it was used
to mean the entire material world, sometimes including humans
and sometimes not (Williams, 1985). This third meaning
appears to be most relevant to our discussion, but it is also
important to recognize that the second meaning suggests a
conceptual framework (nature as a single force rather than 
collection of different forces) that has influenced how many
people have perceived the material world. This breadth of
meaning has provided ample room for discourse about the
essential characteristics of nature and what this implies for
humans. Williams (1985) also observes that the term culture
is similarly complex and subject to multiple interpretations.
Hence, it should not be surprising that there are a variety of
perspectives on the relationship between nature and culture.
Nature and Culture: A Widespread Dichotomy
with Religious Roots
Archaeologist Richard Potts (1996) states: "The independent
origin and eternal separation of ourselves from all other
living things is surely among the most tenacious beliefs in
human thought....This is seen in many origin stories over the
world, from ancient Persia to the Pacific Islands." (p. 269)
Ortner (1974) acknowledges nature and culture as conceptual
categories, the boundaries of which exist in our minds rather
than in the world. She adds, though, that some culture-nature
distinction exists in nearly all cultures. Yet she seems to agree
with Ellen (1996) that each culture draws the boundary between
itself and nature somewhat differently. Meeker et al.
(1973) and Gomez-Pompa nd Kaus (1992) find the distinction
between humans and the rest of nature to be less severe in
many Native American than in western European cultures.
According to Nabhan (1982), Papago people of the Sonoran
Desert consider the saguaro cactus (Cereus giganteus) to be
simultaneously plant and human. Richard Townsend (1992)
reports a more prominent place for animals and plants in
the art and cosmology of pre-Columbian American than in
Mediterranean cultures of the same period.
Callicott (1991) notes that in the western monotheistic tradition
"...man alone is created in the image of God." Possessing
souls, humans have been considered the only beings worthy
of moral consideration. Religious authorities pressured Rene
Descartes to contain his enthusiasm for characterizing life
mechanically when he studied homo sapiens. Descartes accommodated
their concerns by creating the "mind-body" dualism
in which the mind/soul had an independent and eternal existence
that distinguished humans from all other creatures, while
the human body was a separate collection of pumps and levers
like the bodies of other animals.
The biblical notion that people were entitled, or rather
enjoined to dominate nature was, according to historian Carolyn
Merchant (1980), restrained in Europe prior to 1600 
a popular sense that nature was a living entity. She argues
that this respect for nature diminished when it came to be
viewed as more mechanical than living. Thus, monotheism
defended a human-nature dualism on two fronts: from the
pagan tendency to ascribe souls to everything, and from the
mechanistic tendency to deny soul altogether.
Nature as the Raw or Primitive
With urbanization, religion and social thought have tended
to focus more attention on how people should treat each other
and less on the rest of nature (Goudsblom, 1989). Nature 
western European tradition remained part of moral discourse,
however it often shared the stage with the Devil in opposition
to God. Humans were depicted and saints exemplified as struggling
to build a moral character by resisting natural impul-
ses. However, this is nature within humans, not the world
around them.
Thomas Hobbes (1657), provoked by religious sectarian
wars, heaped scorn on religious teaching. According to him,
religion was too doctrinaire and hypocritical to create the
consensus needed for culture, which he understood primarily
as social order. Hobbes replaced the God-nature or soulnature
dichotomy with the now more familiar culture-nature
dichotomy. For him, though, humans could all too easily find
themselves in the state of nature, which he considered to be
an endless war of all against all, where "the life of man [is]
solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short" (p. 100). In Hobbes’
view, humans were separated from the undesirable state of
nature by government. This view was also adopted by Locke
and Rousseau, but with different views of government. Montesquieu
(1748), however, with greater sense for variety 
both people and environment, put the separation in question
by suggesting that different environmental conditions in different
parts of the world favored different forms of government
and social life.
Nature as a condition of strife, want and amorality became
part of classical social theory used to justify hardships of industrialization.
Thomas Malthus’ Essay on Population argued that
poverty was natural, since people will reproduce until reaching
subsistence limits (Malthus, 1803). Inequality is necessary 
that some can prosper enough to separate themselves from
the harshness of nature to maintain culture and refinement.
Although this thinking on nature has been widely shared
among social theorists and critics, it has also been challenged
by several revisionist perspectives, including one arising from
Darwin’s Origin of Species.
Nature Rehabilitated
One revisionist perspective is associated with Herbert Spencer
and other Social Darwinists. Spencer lay aside the idea of
culture separating itself from nature, asserting that nature,
much as Hobbes had described it, is the motor of culture. The
 MclSAAC & BRCrN: NATURAL ENVIRONMENT AND HUMAN CULTURE 7
new twist was to glorify struggle as improving the race. Elites
are not removed from struggle as in Malthus’ conception;
instead they are the most vigorous and successful strugglers.
Culture is natural, evolved as the joint result of millions of
struggling individuals. The fittest survive; the rest perish and
that drives progress. This view combined individualism with
the latest insights of science, provided a justification for the
imperial successes of the European west and the human domination
of other species, and was widely adopted in the Anglo-
Saxon world while receiving a measure of respect elsewhere.
Another revisionist perspective is associated with the Romantic
movement of the 19th century and later within certain
schools in anthropology. Skeptical of industrial society and
the alleged tendency of humans to become progressively more
advanced, it presented a less dismal view of nonhuman nature.
Rather than seeing disordered struggle and destitution that
people needed to correct or separate themselves from, the
Romantics saw a vital wholeness in the natural world that
they thought people should respect and commune with. "In
wildness," wrote Henry David Thoreau, "is the preservation
of the world." Thoreau did not fully accept a segregation of
humans and nature. "I am," he wrote, "nature looking into
nature" (quoted in Worster, 1994). He did, nevertheless, distinguish
nature and culture, arguing that too much culture
over-ripens the human spirit while too little coarsens it (Callicot,
1991). Thoreau’s associate, Ralph Waldo Emerson (1836),
reversed western monotheistic tradition by presenting the contemplation
of nature as a means to communicate with the
transcendent and supernatural.
Petr Kropotkin (1904) began the anthropological debate 
his Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution, with the assertion
that much behavior supposedly representing culture could
be found in nonhuman animals. There followed widespread
accounts of "primitive" human societies showing they were
not always slaving and fighting to survive; some had more
leisure or richer social life than experienced in the industrial
world. Marshall Sahlins (1972) observed that productivity 
pre-industrial societies was low, but so was effort put into
production. He argued that people in those societies were not
plagued, as in industrial societies, by "limitless needs." They
were generally healthy and optimistic about their life and
prospects.
John Muir, inspired by some of the transcendental thought
of Emerson and Thoreau, saw nature as sacred, completely
separate from culture, and sought to preserve it by cordoning
off wilderness areas from human settlement and consumptive
uses. The wilderness movement that he promoted came to
clash repeatedly with the conservation movement, which argued
for economically efficient use of resources. Both camps
agreed that nature should be managed for human use, but
they disagreed on the priorities of management objectives.
The culture/nature dichotomy probably reached its logical
conclusion when McKibben (1989) argued that human influence
had touched every part of the globe and, therefore, nature
defined as untouched by humans no longer existed. McKibben
acknowledged that some scientists consider human impacts
to be within the bounds of their definition of nature. But
he dismissed such definition as too responsive to logical and
semantic considerations, and not truly expressive of our deepest
feelings and instinctive sense of the world (p. 64-65).
McKibben explained that his experience of the inside of his
climate controlled office is quite different from what he experiences
while hiking on a mountain. Such differences, he con-
tended, have been widely observed and predate modern thermostats.
He cited ancient Greek and Christian literature to
support his view that people have for a long time experienced
and understood nature as that which is beyond the influence
of human culture. Not deeper insight, but real human impacts
on the global environment have "ended the distinction that
defined nature for us -- its separation from human society."
(p. 64)
McKibben called it the end of nature when the distinction
from culture dissolved. Merchant (1980) called it the death 
nature when nonhuman nature ceased to be viewed as living,
and became instead tools and resources for culture. Although
they each describe a different transition in human ideas and
feelings about nonhuman nature, they seem to share a common
concern. Both may be thinking in quasi-religious terms
in the sense of Eliade’s (1959) distinction between sacred and
profane. Nature, once sacred, has been profaned; this is what
they see and mourn.
Human Culture as a Part of Nature
McKibben’s view of nature does not sit well with some
advocates of restoration ecology and gardening. Referring
specifically to The End of Nature, restoration ecologist Steven
Packard (1990) argued that "Nature doesn’t end as we become
a part of it any more than our parents cease to be our parents
once they become old and we have to take care of them." In
a discussion about the meaning of the term nature, Packard
(1993) proposed that "...the nature that needs preserving...is
better defined as complex assemblages of species as they have
evolved in their environments over the ages. Whether people
have played a role in this evolution is not key. If people -or
anything else -- change the environment sufficiently so
that substantial numbers of species die rather than evolve
then what we have is degradation (or ’development’)" (p. 
emphasis in the original). We are not advocating Packards’
definition, but present it to illustrate alternative views of nature
and human involvement in it.
Conservationist Aldo Leopold (1949) had previously articulated
a view that integrated humans within the natural world.
He thought that conservation efforts would be ineffective unless
humans saw themselves as members of the land commu-
nity rather than as owners or masters of it. Leopold actively
attempted to restore degraded ecosystems, and thus was a
restoration ecologist before such a term was coined.
Turner (1994) argues that much contemporary environmentalism
is guided by a largely unspoken set of principles that,
among other things, portrays humans as equal to or less than
other species. He argues that this species egalitarianism denies
hierarchies that exist in nature and denies the evolutionary
significance of humans’ capacity for self awareness. Like Potts
(1996), Turner contends that humans and their culture can 
viewed as the most recent fruition of natural evolutionary
processes that have been creating increasing complexity and
self awareness. He further argues with Jordan (1994) that
ecological restoration and ecological invention efforts that
depend on human intervention are the best ways for humans
to fully use and develop the capacities given to them by evolutionary
processes.
In contrast to restorationists who are concerned largely with
reconstruction of ecosystems that existed prior to European
contact with the Americas, Pollan (1991) argues that human
culture can be seen as part of nature in a gardener’s consciousness:
"Anthropocentric as he may be, [the gardener] recog-
nizes that he is dependent for his health on many other forms
of life so he is careful to take their interests into account in
whatever he does. He is in fact a wilderness advocate of a
certain kind. It is when he respects and nurtures the wilderness
of his soil and his plants that his garden seems to flourish
most. The wilderness he has found resides not only out there
but also right here: in his soil, in his plants, even in himself."
 8 J. ENVIRON. QUAL., VOL. 28, JANUARY-FEBRUARY 1999
John Hay (1987), a nature writer, embraces the confusion
surrounding the term nature. Nature (both the human and
nonhuman parts) is full of surprises and he thinks it is better
to adopt an open attitude to receive these surprises rather
than limiting ourselves to a single view. Discovering and experiencing
those surprises are, for Hay, essential parts of life’s
journey. "I will stick to my confusion and the mystery of
things .... Nature undefined is what I know in myself. What
better, more incalculable, capricious and impossible guide
could I have than that! It’s going to be an interesting journey"
(Hay, 1987, p. 10).
ANALYSIS OF THE NATURE/CULTURE
DISTINCTION
We submit that the forgoing account of use provides a more
complete picture of how the term nature has been used and
understood than would an operational definition. Rather than
resolving or defining away the various debates about how
human culture should be seen with respect to nature, we think
such an account positions us to better understand and engage
in them, and it opens up avenues for further analysis, as we
discuss below.
We agree with Johnson et al. that the term natural is frequently
used to indicate that which has not been influenced
by human culture, however, we find the reasoning to support
such a view to be problematic. Some scientific evidence and
reasoning, presented for example by Potts (1996), suggests
that human culture can be considered part of nature, but we
stop short of such a positive argument. We argue merely that
no serious case should be built on their distinction. This agnostic
position nevertheless undermines a strong version of the
culture/nature distinction. We anticipate opposition from two
groups who seek to maintain the sharp culture/nature distinction:
those who hold human welfare to be sacrosanct, and
those wfio hold nonhuman nature to be sacrosanct.
Those who hold human welfare sacrosanct could argue that
dissolving the culture/nature duality would have the effect of
devaluing humans. If there is no difference between humans
and animals, what would prevent us from treating some humans
as we treat some animals? Recall that slavery, war, and
other forms of violence directed against fellow humans have
sometimes been justified or rationalized on the grounds that
the victims or enemies were something less than human.
But dissolving the broad categorical culture/nature distinction
would not necessarily mean dissolving all distinctions
between humans and other animals. We can and do distinguish
between species and appropriate treatment of broad classes
of species. We expect different standards of treatment for
animals depending upon whether they are pets, livestock, wildlife,
or laboratory animals. We treat vertebrate laboratory
animals differently than we treat invertebrates. Thus, even if
humans and animals were part of the same general category
(natural) there would still be several arguments and precedents
for treating humans differently than other animals.
Moreover, if we start from a position of stringent human rights,
including say, the right to a suitable environment, we could
look for ways to legitimately extend such rights to other species
without violating the rights of humans. In this way, we could
increase our valuation of nature without decreasing our valuation
of humans by recognizing that each contributes value to
the other.
Those who hold nonhuman nature sacrosanct are likely to
fear that once the distinction between nature and culture is
gone, there would be less ground for arguing for preservation
of "natural" areas in a condition that is relatively uninfluenced
by humans. There are several good scientific, moral, and economic
arguments for such conservation activities that do not
depend on viewing human culture as unnatural. Dissolving
the distinction between nature and culture seems to undermine
a relatively weak argument that probably has little persuasive
power. This argument depends, in part on the use of the term
natural to indicate that which is good and acceptable. This
usage is not universal, however, since the progress and consequences
of a disease may be seen as entirely natural but totally
unacceptable. For clarity, then, we need to distinguish when
we use the term natural descriptively and when we use it normatively,
Generally equating nature with goodness is a confession
of faith, much like faith in science, economics, technology,
ideology, or religion. Adherents to the "nature is good" faith
generally do not need to be persuaded of the value of preserving
ecosystems in a state relatively unaffected by humans. To
have persuasive power among people of other faiths, ecosystem
preservation needs to be justified in terms of other values
that hold purchase in those faiths. For instance, to appeal to
economically oriented people we usually need justify environmental
conservation on the basis of potential economic value.
When such reasoning fails or is too difficult to explain, it may
seem easier to hold nature apart, with a slightly sacred aura,
and to invoke it when necessary to appeal to emotions. But
such appeals are generally only effective among the "nature
is good" faithful. Appeals to other faiths must be made on
their moral grounds.
Dissolving the culture/nature dichotomy forces us to articulate
reasons why we should protect endangered species and
ecosystems rather than trying to justify it on the basis of a
long-standing conceptual dichotomy that has debatable foundations.
With more precise articulation, we can then develop
specific standards and strategies of protection that are consistent
with our reasons for seeking protection.
If, for instance, we value nonhuman nature because its
processes have guided the evolution of life for eons, while
human processes are relatively new, this provides a more precise
reason for attempting to preserve ecosystems in a state
that might have existed prior to human influence. But, since
human culture is also a product of evolution, we should also
allow for the flourishing of culture and for the coevolution
of culture and nonhuman nature. But what are appropriate
standards of this coevolution? If we value biodiversity and
take it as a standard, then the activities of the Papago people
that have increased biodiversity in the Sonoran desert (Nabhan,
1982, 1997) would appear to be valuable and acceptable.
This is in contrast to the idea that most human caused changes
to an environment should be considered unnatural environmental
degradation. Where the culture/nature dichotomy
forces us to choose either nature or culture, a dissolution of
the dichotomy and a more precise articulation of concerns
provide opportunities to blend ecosystem preservation with
cultural expression and development.
An example of such blending might be seen in a conservation
approach for Midwestern streams proposed by Rhoads
and Herricks (1996) who argue that a process that they call
"naturalization" is more appropriate than attempting to return
streams to a presumably natural pre-settlement condition. The
intensity of the land-use for agriculture in the region has led
to significant hydrologic and geomorphic changes. Achieving
presettlement stream restoration in such a setting would require
massive land-use changes that would be difficult and
unlikely. The problem is compounded by lack of knowledge
about presettlement conditions and uncertainty about whether
environmental changes caused by modern humans should be
considered any less natural than changes caused by other
agents such as glaciers or Native Americans. Naturalization
 McISAAC & BRUN: NATURAL ENVIRONMENT AND HUMAN CULTURE
attempts to create a "new natural system" that includes humans,
yet acquires a diversity of forms and functions that are
generally displayed by systems that have not been impacted
by humans. A similar approach is advocated more generally
by Callicott and Mumford (1997) for terrestrial environments
dedicated to human uses.
These approaches to locating human culture within systems
that are considered natural represent a movement away from
a strict nature/culture dichotomy and attempt to preserve and
cultivate the best features of both nonhuman nature and human
culture. Such examples illustrate the possibility that envi-
ronmental protection, preservation, and restoration need not
depend on drawing and justifying an arbitrary line between
human culture and the rest of the natural world. Of course,
development of these approaches generally proceeds with
more concrete and specific language than afforded by the
terms nature and culture. The movement from vague concepts
to concrete terms allows us increasingly to specify goals and
means in ways that can be usefully debated and ultimately
acted upon.
SUMMARY
The terms nature and natural have been used in a
broad variety of ways. Because of this, attempts to produce
a precise operational definition of nature or deriva-
tive terms like natural environment are not likely to
be very satisfactory. Although natural has been often
portrayed as that which is not affected by human culture,
the reasoning offered to support this view is debatable.
Johnson et al. (1997) justify this definition based on the
scale and rate of human impacts on the environment.
However, the scale and rate of human impacts are variable
and other entities (notably meteorites) have the
potential to cause larger and more rapid environmental
change. The definition of natural environment offered
by Johnson et al. focuses on one causative agent of
change (human culture) rather than the scale and rate
of change. Hence there appears to be inconsistency between
the justification and the definition. Rather than
being unnatural, human culture can also be viewed as
a natural behavioral response to environmental challenges.
Instead of a precise operational definition, we
think that an account of use is a more appropriate
method of communicating the variety of meanings given
to terms such as nature, natural environment, and culture.
Given the breadth of meaning and plausible interpretation,
we think that no serious argument can be made
based on the supposed culture/nature distinction. Dissolving
distinctions made by definition between culture
and nature does not imply that everything humans do
is good and acceptable. Such a conclusion derives from
a normative and hardly universal use of the term natural
that equates it with goodness. In the developing field
of restoration ecology, for example, the distinction between
culture and nature is frequently blurry or non-
existent and this has contributed to innovative thought.
In general, the term natural is so broad that, to avoid
confusion, the intended meaning should be precisely
specified for particular applications. Additionally, the
difficulties with defining terms like natural environment
should be recognized and these terms should be left
open to interpretation as long as there is ongoing controversy
over the definition of nature and natural. Rather
than suggesting more definitions for these multifaceted
terms, we think clarity is more likely if people will carefully
consider the meaning they wish to convey in light
of the variety of other uses for the terms, and then
carefully articulate this meaning with precise and unambiguous
terminology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We appreciate the comments of J. Bruce Litchfield on an
early draft of this manuscript, and of Margarita Alario, Eric
Freyfogle, Eri Fujieda, Bruce Hannon, David Onstad, Tim
Ellsworth, and four anonymous reviewers on later versions.
Eri Fujieda and Tony Endress supplied some very useful references.
Although we have disagreed with Johnson et al. on
several issues, the process of articulating the reasons for our
disagreement has helped us clarify what we think about nature.
For that, we are very grateful to Johnson et al.
 10 J. ENVIRON. QUAL., VOL. 28, JANUARY-FEBRUARY 1999
