What's in a Name Anyway?: 
The Calamity of Calamity Jane 
Ona Russell 
"Who was that chap?" asked Redburn not a little bewildered. 
"That?—why that's Calamity Jane!" 
"Calamity Jane?" " What a name." 
From Deadwood Dick, The Prince of the Road (1877)1 
In the high saddle, picking flies 
off an oxen's ear 
four times out of five, stories 
swelling from camp to camp 
and Jane, hands on hips, 
bullwhacking her way to the bars, 
Whoops and fast draws 
up the wooden sidewalks 
Tonight the West has one name 
and no figure but her own. 
Kathleen Liguell, "Calamity Jane Sets 
the Whole Town on Its Ear," from 
The Calamity Poems (1977)2 
Although Martha Jane Canary became a celebrated frontierswoman known 
as Calamity Jane, no one, including Calamity herself, agrees on how she acquired 
0026-3079/93/3502-0021$ 1.50/0 21 
 her moniker. In an 1880 letter to her daughter, for example, she claims that it was 
Wild Bill Hickok, who, in response to her daring effort to inform him of 
approaching enemies, dubbed her Calamity Jane. In her autobiography, however, 
she gives the credit to Captain Egan, an army commander she supposedly caught 
in her arms just before he fell from his horse. An article from the St. PaulDispatch 
in July, 1901, attributes the appellation to "a faculty she has had of producing a 
ruction at any time and place and on short notice." Yet biographer Lewis 
Crawford claims that the name was communally bestowed upon her by the people 
who witnessed her caring for small pox victims. And the list goes on.3 
These inconsistencies regarding the origin of the name, as well as the 
multiple others that occur in the writings by and about Calamity Jane, have 
prompted many to question not only the credibility of the writings, of the texts 
through which we have access to this legendary woman, but also of the woman 
herself; indeed, they have prompted some to doubt her very existence. By 
contrast, my interest in her name and in her life in general does not center on a 
desire for biographical accuracy; I do not wish to resolve the inconsistencies even 
if it were possible. Instead, I am interested in exploring what the name might have 
signified, what it might have meant in the context of the late nineteenth-century 
United States, particularly to people of the western region of the country where 
Calamity lived most of her life. Rather than trying to discover which of the above 
versions is right, I will attempt to explain why this woman—real or imaginary— 
may have been associated with disaster, indeed viewed by her contemporaries as 
a calamity. 
Despite the obvious differences, all of the accounts mentioned above 
indicate that the name arose from a perceived intrepidness, from Calamity's 
bravery and penchant for physical danger. Whether or not this is true, it was 
certainly this quality that received the most public attention; it was what 
newspaper reporters focused on in their frequent articles about her, why she was 
invited by an agent of the famous Kohl and Middleton Palace Museum in 
Minneapolis to exhibit herself, and also one of the reasons she was asked to 
perform with Buffalo Bill in the Pan American Exposition.4 It was what 
motivated many biographers and historians to record her adventures and what 
inspired dime-novelists to make her a central character of their fiction, particu­
larly Edward L. Wheeler, who cast her as the partner of Deadwood Dick, the 
popular, Western hero whose perilous exploits required someone of unflinching 
courage. I will argue, however, that while such behavior may have been the overt 
reason for acquiring the name, it was what that behavior represented more than 
the behavior itself that made it seem dangerous; specifically, that it was because 
her bravery, strength, and independence were traits associated with a masculine 
ideal and connected with a national identity that she was cast as a threat. More 
specifically, it was because those traits were combined with other, more "femi­
nine" attributes, because she confounded rather than merely challenged gender 
norms that the perception of the threat grew to calamitous proportions. 
22 
 Situating her own writings (both autobiographical and epistolary) and both 
biographical and fictional accounts of her life within the context of the West in 
the late nineteenth century makes it possible to read Calamity as a figure for that 
period's anxiety over the breakdown of gender norms. Before doing so, however, 
I want to emphasize that I do not view these generic categories—autobiography, 
epistolography, biography and fiction—as mutually exclusive or in any hierarchial 
arrangement with respect to a notion of authenticity. As should become clear, the 
larger goal of this paper will be to problematize the kinds of arbitrary divisions 
that create such hierarchies, to expose some of the places where those categories 
converge, to demonstrate that it is there where the most meaningful, if not 
authentic, picture emerges. In addition, I wish to acknowledge that my assump­
tions regarding the anxiety that appears to have been so pervasive at this time 
come of the work of critics such as Carroll Smith-Rosenberg, Jane Tompkins, 
Donna Haraway, Susan Lee Johnson and others. My intent is to augment their 
conversation, to respond particularly to Susan Lee Johnson's recent appeal to 
"illuminate female lives" and "mark the category of white, male experience" in 
the West, through what might be considered a genealogy of one woman who 
embodied that anxiety in an exemplary fashion and who, until now, has been 
primarily discussed from a conventional, biographical perspective.5 
I. Troubling Gender—East and West 
This said, it will nevertheless be helpful to begin by briefly retracing the few 
details of Calamity's life upon which most biographers and Calamity herself 
agree. Born in the Midwest in the early 1850s (the exact date and place of her birth 
is uncertain), Calamity migrated with her family when she was still young to what 
was then Montana Territory. Her parents, apparently poor farmers, died soon 
thereafter, leaving her, her two brothers, and three sisters to fend for themselves. 
Little is known about her siblings, and it is generally believed Calamity soon 
struck out on her own, pursuing the unconventional life that would eventually 
make her a celebrity until her death in 1903. 
I will analyze that life in greater detail later, but suffice it to say that it broadly 
consisted of taking on a wide array of typically male work, dressing in male attire, 
performing in the Wild West shows, gambling, drinking, and becoming involved 
in numerous marriages and love affairs. Yet while Calamity certainly challenged 
convention by engaging in such activities, she lived in a time when other women 
were beginning to do so as well. In particular, the Cult of True Womanhood, 
"which prescribed a female role bounded by kitchen and nursery," was giving 
way to the more liberatory New Woman—what Carroll-Smith Rosenberg iden­
tifies as a "cohort" of educated, white, middle-class women from the East who 
rejected such a confining role, who "assert[ed] their right to a career, to a public 
voice [and] to visible power."6 And she also lived in a time when those challenges 
were being met with resistance. Partly in response to the attitudes espoused by 
23 
 the New Woman emerged "the cult of strenuosity," men of a similar background 
who embraced conventional male roles and implicitly struggled to keep women 
from attaining the rights they desired. More precisely, then, Calamity lived in a 
time when gender norms were being both challenged and reinscribed and in a 
place where the tension between those two positions was acute.7 
It was in the West where this tension was particularly striking, because it was 
there where gendered differences were so overtly exaggerated, where resistance 
to those differences was implicitly denied. The very appeal of "going West," in 
fact, often rested on a magnification of the standard distinctions between men and 
women. Specifically, the West, and, even more specifically, what Henry Nash 
Smith calls the "Wild West," "an exhilarating region of adventure and comrade­
ship in the open air," was constructed as a place where "men could be men," and, 
by extension, where women would have to be women; as a place where men went 
to become strong and independent, to regain the masculinity lost in a supposedly 
feminized East.8 More than a physical locale (indeed, the geographic boundaries 
frequently shifted) it was a psychic space, an imaginative region, inspiring such 
men as Teddy Roosevelt, who referred to it specifically as the "masculine West"; 
S. Weir Mitchell, who, though prescribing the rest cure for his female patients, 
sent his male patients there to recuperate; and Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry 
David Thoreau, and Herman Melville, all of whom invoke symbols of the West 
in their writings.9 In particular, it was the idea of the wilderness, a realm where, 
as Nash states, "nature loomed larger than civilization," that signified a place 
immune from the ongoing challenges to conventional gender categories; it was 
there where male power would forever be safe.10 Yet, it is this very assertion of 
immunity which indicates otherwise, which hints at an underlying vulnerability 
suggesting that those challenges were actually perceived as a menacing force 
requiring a fierce defense. 
Much of the criticism of Calamity reveals the anxiety that such a sense of 
vulnerability might produce. Though her minimal, third-grade education, work­
ing-class background, and geographic location would technically disqualify her 
from membership in the exclusive society of New Women, she too rejected 
conventional female roles and clearly disturbed many for doing so. Indeed, 
whether targeted at her physical daring or her daring to wear men's clothing, 
disparaging comments about Calamity's behavior reveal an underlying uneasi­
ness implicitly linked to the transgressi ve nature of that behavior. One of the most 
compelling signs of this uneasiness is that most people, while never questioning 
the veracity of her work as a nurse, of work considered inherently female, refused 
to believe that she had performed the conventionally male tasks attributed to her. 
They, in effect, avoided the problem or dealt with the uneasiness by denying that 
it ever existed. As biographer Roberta Beed Sollid asserts, "writers" (including, 
by the way, Sollid herself) "who usually give no credence to most Calamity tales 
are more than willing to credit her with at least rough abilities as a nurse."11 
According to Sollid, though her contemporaries unanimously agreed that Calam­
ity "could be called upon for aid whenever anyone was sick and in need of help"— 
24 
 that she, in other words, always fulfilled her ascribed nurturing role—they were 
far more skeptical about her alleged work as a scout, gun woman, and bull whacker; 
in fact, many considered such allegations a "hoax."12 
Two more specific examples of the anxiety that Calamity's transgressive 
behavior provoked appear in accounts relating to her unconventional appearance. 
The first is when she is arrested and immediately "placed in improvised female 
attire," after being discovered as a woman by employers who, because she wore 
male clothing to attain a job as a scout, thought she was a man.13 The second, 
related by Calamity herself, is an incident in which some of the women of her town 
tried to cut her hair so she would look "like the fancy women in Paris," an act that, 
in its extremity, suggests, as does the reaction of her employers in the first 
example, more than a desire for fashion correctness. Indeed, this indicates a 
deeper concern for conformity to a contemporary female standard.14 This seems 
particularly true when viewed in relationship to the mandates of the larger culture, 
to, for example, an 1877 ruling in Cheyenne, Wyoming, forbidding women to 
appear on the streets in men's clothing.15 And it seems truer still when considered 
in the context of nineteenth-century conduct literature, almost all of which, as in 
the following example, proclaim a direct correspondence between external 
appearance and an essential, internal character: "We are free to choose what 
course we will pursue, and our bodies, our brains, and our features readily adapt 
themselves and clearly indicate the lives we lead and the characters we form."16 
The effort that conduct and advice writers of this time made to establish this 
correspondence, to make it appear natural, emphasizes the anxiety that must have 
been experienced over women who, like Calamity, dressed like a man. For what 
such women proved by doing so is that such a correspondence was arbitrary, that 
there was nothing natural about it at all. Women might be told to wear dresses and 
men to wear pants, but there was nothing inherent in the clothing or the person that 
guaranteed a symmetrical relationship between the two. Why this might have 
been so disturbing, of course, particularly to men, is that it signaled a possible 
threat to their power and authority. If women could look like men, then, 
theoretically, they could act like them as well. Indeed, if, as John Kasson in 
Rudeness and Civility suggests, a symmetrical relationship between an external 
and internal self was asserted in the service of the status quo, if it "provided 
standards by which to assess entire social classes, ethnic groups, and cultures 
(often justifying their subordination)," then a rupture in that symmetry—a 
woman whose appearance didn't match the essentialized qualities attributed to 
her—would be threatening indeed, would make a justification for her subordina­
tion far more difficult.17 
II. Individualism: The Forbidden Fruit 
The individualism that Calamity's appearance signified, however, was 
perhaps the most troubling part of that rupture, since such a trait was not only 
associated with masculinity but with an essential American character. As Nina 
25 
 Baym suggests in "Melodramas of Beset Manhood," and writers from Emerson 
and Thoreau to the more popular conduct writers implicitly demonstrate, indi­
vidualism, masculinity, and national identity were often conflated, represented as 
nearly one and the same thing.18 Emerson's call for self-reliance, Thoreau's to 
"march to different a drummer," and the paradoxical advice of many conduct 
writers to think independently both implicitly and explicitly exclude women 
while simultaneously (and paradoxically) relating such behavior to the demo­
cratic principles upon which the country was supposedly founded. All implicitly 
invoke—or collectively invent—what Baym identifies as the American myth, "a 
confrontation of the American individual, the pure American self divorced from 
specific social circumstances, with the promise offered by the idea of America."19 
Although, as Gillian Brown has recently argued, that self was, in the nineteenth 
century, "inflected with the values of interiority, privacy and psychology," with 
values that increasingly became associated with the domestic sphere, all code that 
individual as male since women, who had neither (the same degree of) mobility 
nor the vote, who were neither free to confront that self nor legally recognized as 
individuals, were bound to those circumstances.20 
It becomes particularly easy to see why a woman who embodied these 
characteristics, who thought and attempted to act as an individual, might be so 
troubling when one considers that women's central function within that myth was 
to passively bolster the male ego. Baym discusses how canonized writers from 
Cooper to Fitzgerald have symbolically cast women in this role, citing in 
particular Nick Carraway's evocation in The Great Gatsby of the "fresh green 
breast" of the New World: a feminized image which bolsters (or, perhaps more 
precisely, strokes) that ego through its offering of virginity (the "fresh green­
ness") and "promise [of] maternal solace and delight" (the breast).21 But, 
interestingly enough, even in the dime novels in which Calamity appears, in a 
genre in which competing discourses often allow women to "skirt the boundaries 
of genteel codes," a desire for women to go on serving this function is implicitly 
present.22 Take, for example, one of the few novels whose title bears her name: 
DeadwoodDick on Deck, or Calamity Jane, Heroine of Whoop-up. Even though 
Calamity is portrayed here as aggressively performing the most masculine of 
tasks, she is also described as possessing the physical characteristics that would 
associate her with the Carraway image: "rosy, plump lips," a "faultless waist," 
"dainty feet," and, perhaps not as welcoming as the one Carraway invokes but 
equally symbolic of a desire for both the virginal and the maternal, "a breast of 
alabaster purity."23 Never mind that Calamity actually bore little resemblance to 
this description. As Sandy, a character in the novel asserts, despite all her male 
ability, she is still one of the descendants "o' thet leetle fruitful scrape in a certain 
gareden yeers ago, afore ther Antediluve," and therefore has inscribed upon her, 
by writers of "high" and "low" culture alike, the ideological markings that 
accompany that unfortunate position.24 
26 
 As Baym goes on to explain, women, as they had been "from time 
immemorial," from the time "o' thet leetle fruitful scrape," were associated with 
nature and "heroes of the American myth turn to nature as sweetheart and nurture, 
anticipating the satisfactions of all desires through her and including among these 
the desires for mastery and power."25 The land, gendered female, was there (and 
theirs) for the taking, was there for men to tame and control. A woman like 
Calamity, who (especially in the West, where this myth held such currency) failed 
to fulfill this function, who wanted to control herself, would thus be perceived as 
hazardous to the health of the male ego, and by implication, to the health of the 
country with which that ego was so intimately linked. 
in . Compatriots in Crime 
There were other women like Calamity, "bold, bad women," who, as 
biographer Grace Ernestine Ray puts it, "rode across the pages of history."26 
Though Calamity certainly possessed unique attributes, she was also a type of 
woman well-known on the frontier, a larger-than-life personality who challenged 
conventions in a particularly visible and often illegal way. Many of these women, 
such as Ella Watson ("Cattle Kate") and Belle Starr ("The Bandit Queen"), 
became known and were nicknamed for their alleged criminal activity: Watson, 
for buying stolen cattle, and Starr, for bank and stagecoach robberies. Many of 
them, including Watson and Starr, were also known for being sexually promis­
cuous, whether as paid prostitutes or simply, as was the case with Calamity, for 
having numerous lovers. But as with Calamity, it was the conventionally male 
traits underpinning such activity that seem to have been most troubling; it was 
because such women were "bold" that they were considered to be so "bad." 
Specifically, there was often more concern about the daring and skill required to 
commit the crimes than about the crimes themselves; breaking the law of the land 
might be wrong, but breaking the Law of the Father, in a land where fathers were 
thought to be losing ground, was considered a sin. Grace Ernestine Ray, for 
instance, states that a local paper gave Ella Watson the far more sinister and, 
significantly, unnatural name of "dark devil" because she could sit straight in a 
saddle, was "expert with a branding iron," and "handy with a six-shooter and 
Winchester"; in other words, because she could do the things only a man should 
have been able to do.27 And James Horan suggests that Belle Starr acquired the 
more derogatory name of "Terrible Petticoat" for similar reasons: because she 
could "outride the best of the bronc riders and outswagger and outshoot most of 
the gunfighters who pushed their way along the wooden sidewalks of Fort 
Smith."28 
It was, moreover, the ability to shoot, or even worse, to "outshoot," that 
seems to have been the most anxiety-producing of all the skills these women 
possessed. This was presumably because the power associated with a gun as well 
as the obvious sexual connotations of the gun itself made it threatening to men on 
27 
 both a literal and symbolic level. Since a gun was viewed as a sign of masculinity, 
as an instrument men used "to bring," as one writer so aptly put it, "[their] law and 
order to a lawless land," women who mastered its technique would understand­
ably make some of those men nervous.29 Manifestations of this feeling abound 
in biographical writings about these women, two of the most provocative of 
which appear in the following anecdotes relayed by Grace Ernestine Ray and 
Roberta Beed Sollid, respectively. The first is about Pauline Cushman, another 
western woman of Calamity's ilk, and the second about Calamity herself. In 
Cushman's case, an observer reported that in an attempt to stop a sadistic mulewhacker
from brutally beating his mules, Cushman drew a Winchester on him and 
ordered him to "unhitch those mules." The observer further stated that the man 
readily obeyed, but also noted that the whole episode "tended to take the starch 
out of [the] bully."30 Similarly, someone who witnessed Calamity "[pulling] a 
gun and a volley of language on a bull-whacker because he was belaboring a tired 
ox," reported that her order to stop was also quickly obeyed. But as in the incident 
with Cushman, the observer also added something else: that the man "didn't even 
frown at the beast when she [Calamity] got through with him."31 What is 
suggested in both cases is that a woman with a gun was threatening not only 
because she was physically dangerous, but because she was emasculating, 
because in taking up arms, she took control of the very object that made a man a 
"man." (Especially, one would imagine, when, as in these cases, she used that gun 
to preserve rather than take innocent life, when she adopted "manly" force in 
pursuit of "womanly" goals.) 
This kind of interaction between a gun-toting woman and a man, usually 
unscrupulous, is also frequently depicted in the Wheeler novels. In the first of the 
Deadwood Dick stories, a dishonest gambler, after having Calamity "[thrust] the 
muzzle of one of her plated revolvers forcibly under [his] prominent nose," knew 
that he "dare not reach for his weapon lest the daredevil girl...should salt him on 
a full ay."32 Though the passage is ostensibly about the gambler's attempt to 
protect his life, it linguistically suggests that he is far more concerned about 
protecting his manhood. The image of Calamity "forcibly thrusting" her gun on 
a man whose "weapon" lay immobile beside him reverses the "normal" sexual 
(and power) dynamic, leaving the man symbolically impotent and, as "salt[ing] 
him on full ay" suggests, in immanent danger of castration. Thus, in addition to 
showing narrative convergences—here between popular fiction and biography— 
passages such as this also suggest the kind of ideological parallels witnessed in 
the passage earlier compared to The Great Gatsby. Indeed, though the story 
would appear to possess contestatory potential, as is perhaps most strikingly 
exemplified by Calamity's refusal at the end of the narrative to marry Deadwood 
Dick and by her decision to ride off in the hills instead, it also reinscribes 
conventional notions about gender and gender relations. In fact, if Phillip 
Durham, author of The Negro Cowboys, is right in asserting that the man who 
inspired the character of Deadwood Dick was probably a black cowboy named 
28 
 Nat Love, then one has to wonder, considering typical nineteenth-century 
attitudes toward miscegenation, just how contestatory even Calamity ' s refusal of 
marriage really was.33 
IV. Performing Performances 
A further indication of the threat such women were thought to have posed is 
that their skill with a gun (as well as with a horse and a rope) was often transformed 
by the Wild West shows into a public spectacle. Coordinators of these shows 
solicited women who, like Calamity, could shoot, sometimes even giving them 
a place of prominence within the program. But I would argue that in having them 
perform their skill, by including it as part of a theatrical production, they 
implicitly tried to fictionalize it and thereby, as perhaps dime novelists sought to 
do as well, ameliorate the threat it posed outside the confines of the stage. The 
deliberate way writers of the programs promoted such women would certainly 
seem to support such a notion. Notice in the following excerpt, for instance, the 
effort made to reassure the public that despite their "male" ability, these were still 
women in the most conventional sense of the word: 
[Our women] are not of the new woman class—not of the sort 
that discards her feminine attributes and tries to ape the man, 
simply lively, athletic young women with a superfluity of 
nerve and animal spirits, with a realization that in affairs where 
skill is the chief qualification she has an equal chance with her 
brothers.34 
The rhetorical move of beginning with an affirmation of their femininity relegates 
the ability to a subservient position, while the casual use of "simply" preceding 
the description of it attempts to diminish its force. Such women might be able to 
shoot like their brothers (and "tame the wildest bronc or hang upside down over 
the hooves of a galloping steed,") but they would never be, nor—as this passage 
so adamantly asserts—have the desire to be, anything but a sister. 
Even when promotional pieces did not explicitly emphasize the femininity 
of the performers, their aim was clearly the same as those who did: to reassure the 
public that what they were about to see was something they would only encounter 
in a theatrical setting. Take the following ad about Calamity, for example, which 
ran on the theater page of the Minneapolis Journal: 
KOHL & MIDDLETON 
PALACE MUSEUM 
WEEK BEGINNING MON. JAN. 20 
The famous woman scout of the Wild West. Heroine of a 
thousand thrilling adventures. The Terror of evildoers in the 
29 
 Black Hills! The comrade of Buffalo Bill and Wild Bill 
Hickok. See this famous woman and hear her graphic descrip­
tions of her daring exploits.35 
While the ad actually demonstrates that Calamity's ability originated outside that 
setting, the sensationalized rhetoric recasts that ability as performance as well; 
indeed, it suggests that when Calamity is around, even a natural landscape like the 
Black Hills of South Dakota takes on the function of theatrical props.36 
It is nevertheless doubtful whether such efforts were entirely successful in 
convincing spectators that what they were viewing was only make-believe. An 
anxious audience might, through some kind of Aristotelian catharsis, be tempo­
rarily assuaged by seeing unruly behavior theatrically contained, by witnessing 
a beginning, a middle, and, especially, an end to it all. But because that unruliness 
was actually "connected with everyday circumstances outside the privileged time 
[of the shows]," because women like Calamity could shoot in the streets as well 
as on the stage, it was capable of undermining as well as generating audience 
comfort.37 
Roberta Beed Sollid's following account of an article that ran in the Miles 
City Daily Star in 1934 is a case in point. It refers to a man, who, thirty-three years 
earlier, had witnessed Calamity performing on the Midway at the Buffalo 
Exposition: 
After a great fan-fare and bugle calls, Calamity "came tearing 
into the ring on horseback, buckskins, boots and guns, and stole 
the show." Mr. Newcom attended this exhibition with some 
pious eastern relatives. Learning that the cowgirl was a former 
Montana acquaintance of his, they insisted upon meeting her. 
Worried and trembling at what this western character might do 
and say to startle his sedate relatives, Newcom led them back 
stage for an introduction. All ended well for Calamity put on 
a most lady-like act (italics mine).38 
What is implied in this passage is that the "worried and trembling" Mr. Newcom 
was afraid that Calamity's stage performance would spill over into "real" life. 
Her "masculine" prowess, symbolized by her aggressive movements, conven­
tional male clothing, and gun were acceptable in the ring, but not "back stage." 
Yet what is also implied is that Mr. Newcom knew Calamity was more like her 
stage persona than his "pious eastern relatives" would have liked; that the real 
performance—putting on the "most lady-like act"—would actually occur in that 
non-theatrical space behind the stage. "All ended well" for this particular 
spectator, not because he believed the threat to be over, but because Calamity 
performed even better after the performance than she did while it was taking 
place. Had he seen her later in town, things might have been different. For it was 
30 
 there that she purportedly "knocked out a policeman, and was arrested"; it was 
there that art and life collided in precisely the manner he had feared.39 
In Gender Trouble, Judith Butler argues that there is "no gender identity 
behind the expressions of gender," that such identity is "performatively consti­
tuted by the very 'expressions' that are said to be its results." If Butler is right, 
then the possibility of the shows undermining the comfort they sought to produce 
seems even more likely.40 For what these shows did by featuring performances 
which emphasized masculine skill and prowess is implicitly emphasize the 
performance of gender that was (always already) occurring. Indeed, if one also 
agrees with Butler's contention that a "deregulated play of attributes" conditions 
the exposure of this fictive production (of gender), then it is almost certain that 
a conventionally-minded audience would experience some degree of discomfort, 
since what the shows foregrounded (within an admittedly regulated format) is just 
this kind of play.41 Female performers can be said to have operated under 
"deregulated" conditions because even though they were performing—"playing" 
at being masculine—they nevertheless demonstrated that they could actually do 
those things that, theoretically, they were only pretending to do. And male 
performers can be said to have done so as well because even though they 
performed acts considered natural to their gender, they did so alongside women 
who could do them too, sometimes with greater competence. In both cases, that 
traits associated with masculinity were presented in as exaggerated a manner as 
they were in the Wild West shows hint at both an awareness and uneasiness that 
"all the figures onstage [were] impersonators," that the "lived experience" of 
gender was often contradictory to the essentialized condition it was hypothesized 
to be.42 
That some of the women were, as previously mentioned, known for being 
sexually promiscuous no doubt contributed to that awareness (and uneasiness). 
This is because such behavior was also one of the définitive features of being a 
"man"; "the masculine ethos that allotted respect to the hearty drinker and sexual 
athlete" was strongly adhered to, despite efforts by reformers in the early part of 
the century to combat it.43 Because promiscuity in men was nearly synonymous 
with masculinity, women whose "male" skills were accompanied by it must have 
been seen as a particularly serious force to be reckoned with. And although it is 
beyond the scope of this paper to address this issue in depth, I want to suggest that 
it was not only men that might have felt this way ; some women too (recall the haircutting
incident mentioned earlier) must have been threatened by such behavior, 
particularly white, middle-class women who, as Nancy Armstrong, Carroll 
Smith-Rosenberg and others have argued, positioned themselves as the moral 
guardians of society, as the ones to uphold the values of family and home by 
regulating (especially sexual) behavior and denying altogether the existence of 
female desire. 
There were, of course, western, female celebrities who were not so socially 
daring, and whose lives seemed to actually match the promotional propaganda. 
31 
 Annie Oakley, for example, although a crack shot and one of the first female Wild 
West stars, was married to the same man for years and was, according to most 
accounts, "always girlish," someone who actually did "help ease audience 
concern about the role of women in the Wild West."44 That she was innocuously 
nicknamed "Little Missy" certainly reflects such ease, especially if we recall the 
names bestowed upon the women mentioned above. Even more provocatively, 
however, it is an ease which has been extraordinarily enduring. Because, unlike 
Calamity, who was certainly as well-known, Oakley was considered a role model 
for many girls in the latter part of this century, with clothes, handbags, lunch 
boxes, and quite recently (no doubt due to the current country-western craze), a 
perfume, all created in her honor. Manufacturers, like the curators of the Buffalo 
Bill Historical Center in Cody, Wyoming, who devote an entire exhibit to Oakley 
but omit any mention of Calamity, apparently found her a more acceptable—and 
more marketable figure.45 So too, it would seem, did a good many of the 
biographers cited in this paper, since they rarely include her in anthologies with 
Calamity: anthologies such as Wily Women of the West, Wild Women, Desperate 
Women and Shady Ladies of the West continue to construct the women to whom 
they refer as dangerous, unnatural, and as Duncan Aikman makes explicit by 
dedicating Calamity Jane and the Lady Wildcats "to various uncontrollable 
ladies," beyond the forces of control.46 
V. Writing (by) Herself 
If strategically acting on one's own behalf means that one is uncontrollable, 
however, then perhaps Aikman was right; because what Calamity demonstrates, 
especially in her writings, is that this is exactly what she attempted to do. This 
is particularly true of some of the letters she wrote to her daughter. Indeed, in 
some of the explanations she gives her daughter for her transgressive behavior, 
one observes a conscious defiance and manipulation of convention. In referring 
to her wearing of men's clothing, for instance, she states, "I wear pants so I can 
get around while these petticoted females yell for help." To explain her gambling, 
she claims that she did it to "pay for her daughter's education," a conventional 
excuse but one which allowed her to participate in an activity she is known to have 
enjoyed. And in accounting for her refusal to re-marry quickly, she asserts, 
"Think I'll be married again, but the thought of being tied to a man's shirt tail 
sickens me."47 What all these comments indicate is that she was at least 
temporarily able, as Butler claims everyone is if they were to reconceptualize 
gender in performative terms, to control the discourse that attempted to control 
her, that she defied those codes of proper female behavior to get what she did or 
did not want. As she herself asserts, rather than being tied to a man's shirt, she 
wore one to "get around." 
That these comments were expressed only in her most private writings, 
however, suggests that she was not, as one can never be, entirely exempt from that 
32 
 discourse, particularly from the part which divided the public and private along 
gender lines. Her official, seven-page autobiography, for example, is a far less 
open and critical account. There, she briefly records her life in a chronological 
and neutral rhetorical fashion, skimming over or omitting some of the controver­
sial points that she emphasizes in the letters. For instance, in the autobiography, 
she simply calls William Hickok ("Wild Bill") her friend, while in the letters she 
claims to have married him and, in fact, claims that he is the legitimate father of 
her daughter. Though marriage and a desire for legitimacy would seem to be 
acceptable enough, she avoids the public controversy that such a statement would 
provoke (since most people doubted that Hickok returned her affections), and 
thereby appears to conform to rather than defy a contemporary female standard. 
In the autobiography as well, she shows no sympathy whatsoever for the Sioux, 
the tribe against whom she claims to have been hired to protect white miners and 
settlers. But in the privacy of the letters, in a feminized space removed from the 
public gaze, she demonstrates sympathy for another group of Indians by acknowl­
edging the origins of their hostility: "Custer had molested an Indian village, 
running the squaws and children from their camps, so one can't blame them for 
getting even in their own way."48 Though, admittedly, the actions of the two tribes 
may have warranted different responses, the relationship of those responses to the 
discursive medium in which they are contained cannot be overlooked; that 
Calamity attempts to j ustify the retaliation of a people oppressed by the dominant 
ideology in private but says nothing whatsoever in public reveals how she herself 
was oppressed by that ideology. 
Nevertheless, Calamity's relationship to the public and private, to these two 
supposedly separate spheres was, as everything else in her life, anything but clearcut.
Recall, for instance, that the highly public performances of the Wild West 
shows were not that dissimilar from her more private (although frequently 
publicized) acts of daring and skill. Nor was her wearing of men's clothing an 
exclusively private or public act; indeed, the reasons she provides for wearing 
them—personal comfort and public access—reveal that it was both. And even 
here in the writings, where the line between the public and private is more 
discernable, Calamity proves what critics such as Mary Kelly, Christine Stansell, 
and others have recently argued: that such a line was, in reality, frequently 
crossed, that it existed more in theory than in practice.49 
For instance, even though Calamity does say things in the letters that might 
be considered controversial, she also reveals a more conventional side there, a 
maternal side that, while meant for oniy her daughter to see, would presumably 
hold up well under public scrutiny. This is especially true of her desire to give her 
daughter legitimacy; as I previously suggested, those troubled by her guns, 
clothes, and promiscuity would no doubt have been comforted as well as 
surprised to hear that she did not have a child out of wedlock. Conversely, even 
though Calamity does edit out controversial statements in the autobiography, 
what remains, what she leaves in, is potentially just as controversial. Because all 
.33 
 that she really mentions there are her acts of daring, acts that again were thought 
to be inherently male, the autobiography is a document that should have been kept 
private, shielded from public view. For unlike the more overt fictionality of the 
Wild West shows, shows in which those acts were also foregrounded, an 
autobiography (although now understood to be both performative and fictional) 
was conventionally conceived of as a "truth of the essential self and therefore, 
in this case, could serve to exacerbate rather than ameliorate the fears of an 
anxious public.50 
Moreover, simply by writing an autobiography, as brief as it might be, 
Calamity crosses that line once again because she enters a discursive (and public) 
terrain traditionally forbidden to women (one might even say that the brevity of 
the work itself, especially combined with its frequent, fragmented sentences— 
"Father and mother natives of Ohio"; "Remained around Fort Bridges during 
1868.."51—denotes such a crossing, since it resembles the speech writers of 
[particularly] western fiction ascribe to their male characters).52 As Sidonie 
Smith asserts in A Poetics of Women's Autobiography: 
Because the "normative" definition of autobiography and the 
criteria used to evaluate the success of any particular autobiog­
raphy lie in the relationship of the autobiographer to the arena 
of public life and discourse, and because "patriarchal notions 
of woman's inherent nature and consequent social role have 
denied or severely proscribed her access to the public space; 
and male distrust and consequent repression of female speech 
have either condemned her to public silence or profoundly 
contaminated her relationship to the pen as an instrument of 
power," women's "autobiographies remain unwritten or, when 
written and read, are "misread and labeled inferior..."53 
To therefore even identify her writing (or, better yet, have it identified by her 
publishers) as an autobiography and to further assert, as she does in the title, that 
it was written "by herself," is to indeed do something that, as Smith says, 
"challenged the supposedly private nature of woman."54 
VI. The Calamity of De-Classified Information 
Thus, what appears to have intensified the perception of Calamity as a 
calamity is the fact that her transgression of gender lines was not absolute. As I 
have tried to demonstrate, Calamity confounded rather than inverted gender 
classifications and did so at a time when, as Donna Haraway, Allan Sekula, 
Carroll Smith-Rosenberg, and others have pointed out, classification was becom­
ing the conceptual modus operandi, when systematic ordering of information 
became the preoccupation of most disciplines, and when the notion of a discipline 
34 
 itself was being invented.55 Again, though Calamity dressed, shot, and had the 
courage attributed to a man, she had long, flowing hair and confessed to numerous 
heterosexual affairs and marriages. Though she performed the typically male 
tasks of bullwhacking and scouting, she was also a nurse and, as her letters 
indicate, a loving mother. She could not, therefore, be easily classified, not, for 
instance, as a lesbian (for it was in the late 1800s that the category emerged, when 
male sexologists and psychologists invented it by "initiat[ing] a public attack 
upon women's love for one another"), since her well-known heterosexual 
encounters and nurturing behavior challenged the lesbian stereotype.56 And 
though she was categorized by some as a "fallen woman," her clothing and "male" 
behavior served to displace her from that category as well, since such women 
were often understood to both dress and behave in an especially seductive 
manner. 
What such indeterminability indeed suggests is that more than challenging 
the categories of male and female, Calamity, who occupied multifarious subject 
positions and "exposed the fiction of a cohesive notion of [the self]," put into 
question the idea of a category itself.57 And in this regard, it is worth noting that, 
according to Marjorie Garber, she resembles many others who have also been 
known for their cross-dressing practices. In her recent work, Vested Interests, 
Garber traces the long and diverse cultural history of the transvestite to formulate 
a provocative argument about the ideological significance of cross-dressing. I 
cannot describe that argument in detail here, but it should be mentioned that 
Garber identifies Calamity as "a lifelong trans vesti te," and while I do not entirely 
agree with this assessment, there are aspects of Garber's definition of the 
transvestite that strikingly correspond to the unusual way Calamity was allowed 
to conduct herself.58 Specifically, Garber's description of the transvestite as a 
"disruptive element that intervenes," that permits "a borderline to become 
permeable," and permits border crossings from one apparently distinct category 
to another, is particularly applicable because Calamity actually did permeate 
borders and gained access into places and spaces that would have normally been 
forbidden.59 As a character in one of the Dead wood Dick stories puts it, she 
seemed to be "here, there and everywhere all at the same time."60 
Despite some of the limitations imposed on her textually, Calamity had a 
mobility that most women, and even some men did not. According to historian 
James Horan, for instance, Calamity was the only woman to be admitted to 
"Russell's," a famous saloon in her hometown of Dead wood, South Dakota. She 
was also permitted to ride "the cars," "always sitting in the men's smoker puffing 
away at a cigar."61 Moreover, in one of her letters to her daughter, Calamity tells 
of how the combination of her long hair and scouting attire—how, in other words, 
a juxtaposition of supposedly female and male attributes—allowed her to safely 
enter hostile Indian territory (her term, of course), how when she took off her cap 
and let her hair blow in the breeze, the Indians, who would have presumably 
attacked a man for the same intrusion, thought she was crazy and left her alone. 
35 
 Whether the Indians themselves associated craziness with this juxtaposition is 
unknown, although it would be a worthy question to pursue. As historian Joan 
Scott notes, "Entry alone does not solve all the questions of discrimination," 
particularly, when as in Calamity's case, the space one enters is occupied by 
another oppressed group.62 But her ability to penetrate borders, to go places where 
even men could not go, might have indeed been cause for alarm, particularly at 
a time when new borders were being established—Wyoming, Idaho, Utah, and 
Montana were all admitted to the Union in the late 1800s—and male authority 
was thought to be in jeopardy. 
Such inability to pin down Calamity Jane may also explain why she is 
generative of so many stories, why there are so many versions of her name and 
her life. It may be because she permeated the boundaries and slipped through the 
frames that sought to contain her that she was repeatedly framed by others 
(myself, of course, included). I want to end, however, by suggesting that it was 
also this identity instability that makes Calamity a particularly fitting represen­
tative of the region in which she lived, more fitting than many who have come to 
occupy that position. For as many critics have recently demonstrated, the West 
was itself a kind of shifting signifier, a far more diverse and ambiguous place than 
it has often been portrayed. In fact, if we return to Liguell 's poem which prefaced 
this essay, specifically to the penultimate line, "Tonight the West has one name," 
we can see that it depicts Calamity serving precisely this function; indeed, here, 
person and place are identical. But even more insightfully, while it sets up this 
correspondence, it does not, as most representations of (white) men in the West 
have done, fix it; the woman and the region are united for only one night, leaving 
other nights free for those who were also there, who also had names and lives 
worthy of exploring. 
Notes 
1. Edward Wheeler, Deadwood Dick, The Prince of the Road (New York, 1877), 4. 
2. Kathleen Liguell, The Calamity Poems (Berkeley, 1979). 
3. Roberta Beed Sollid, Calamity Jane: A study in Historical Criticism (Helena, 1958), 33-39. 
Sollid lists at least five different versions of the origin of the name, including both the one from the 
St. Paul Dispatch and that of Lewis Crawford. 
4. From the late 1800s until Calamity's death in 1903, papers such as Livingston, Montana's 
The Livingston Enterprise and The Livingston Post recorded Calamity's adventures on nearly a 
weekly basis. Many others such as Bozeman's The Avant Courier and The Miles City Daily Star also 
did stories on Calamity but not with the same degree of regularity. In almost all cases, Calamity's 
bravery was either explicitly or implicitly invoked. 
5. Susan Lee Johnson, "A memory sweetto soldiers": The Significance of Genderin the History 
of the American West," The Western Historical Quarterly 4 (November, 1990), 499. 
6. Carroll Smith-Rosenberg, Disorderly Conduct: Visions of Gender in Victorian America 
(New York and Oxford, 1985), 176. 
7. For more on The New Woman and The Cult of Strenuosity, see Carroll Smith-Rosenberg, 
Disorderly Conduct; Gearld D. Nash, Creating the West: Historical Interpretations 1890-1990 
(Albuquerque, 1992); Kent Ladd Steckmesser, The Western Hero in History and Legend (Norman, 
1965); Elizabeth Ammons, "The Engineer as Cultural Hero and Willa Cather's First Novel, 
Alexander's Bridge" American Quarterly 38 (Winter, 1986), 746-760. 
8. Henry Nash Smith, Virgin Land: The American West as Symbol and Myth (Cambridge and 
36 
 London, 1978), 52. 
9. Roosevelt's masculine vision of the West has been widely discussed but I believe most 
provocatively by Donna Haraway in "Teddy Bear Patriarchy: Taxidermy in the Garden of Eden, New 
York City, 1908-1936," Primate Visions: Gender, Race and Nature in the World of Modern Science 
(New York, 1989), 26-58. The Mitchell to whom I am referring is the physician Charlotte Perkins 
Gilman infamously represented in The Yellow Wallpaper. Both Henry Nash Smith in Virgin Land and 
Richard Slotkin in Regeneration Through Violence: The Mythology of the American Frontier 
(Hanover, 1973) discuss the influence of the West on the writings of Emerson, Thoreau, Melville and 
others of their ilk. 
10. Henry Nash Smith, 78. 
11. Sollid,65. 
12. Sollid,63. 
13. Sollid,29. 
14. Martha Canary Hickok, Calamity Jane's Letters to Her Daughter (San Lorenzo, 1976). 
15. Sollid,20. 
16. John Kasson, Rudeness and Civility: Manners in Nineteenth Century Urban America (New 
York, 1990), 149. 
17. Kasson, 7. 
18. By individualism I mean something like E.P. McPherson ' s definition of the right to "manage 
[oneself] as [one] wishes." Although this fails to reflect the actual complexity of the term, it accurately 
describes the aspect of individualism with which I am concerned here. See Gillian Brown, Domestic 
Individualism: Imagining Self in Nineteenth-Century America (Berkeley, 1990), 2. 
19. Nina Baym, "Melodramas of Beset Manhood," The New Feminist Criticism: Essays on 
Women, Literature and Theory éd., Elaine Showalter (New York, 1985), 71. 
20. Brown, 1. 
21. Baym, 75. 
22. Michael Denning, Mechanic Accents: Dime Novels and Working-Class Culture in America 
(London and New York, 1987), 194. 
23. Edward L. Wheeler, DeadwoodDick on Deck; or Calamity Jane, The Heroine of WhoopUp
(New York, 1877), 19. 
24. Wheeler, 34. 
25. Baym, 75. 
26. Grace Ernestine Ray, Wily Women of the West (San Antonio, 1972), 10. 
27. Ray, 22-6. 
28. James Horan, Desperate Women (New York, 1952), 174. 
29. Steckmesser, 136. 
30. Ray, 122. 
31. Sollid, 96. 
32. Wheeler, 8. 
33. InThe Negro Cowboys (New York, 1956), 191-206. Phillip Durham acknowledges that this 
is only one version among many, but believes it to be the most plausible. 
34. Sarah Wood Clark, Women of The Wild West Shows (Billings, 1991), 8. 
35. Sollid, 78. 
36. For more on some of the ideological implications of the Wild West Shows, see John F. Sears, 
Sacred Spaces: American Tourist Attractions in the Nineteenth Century (New York and Oxford, 
1986), 156-181. Sears points out that one of the objectives of Wild West Shows was to transform both 
the "participants in the settling of the West into actors" and "turn contemporary events of Western 
history into theater" ( 156). 
37. Here, I am quoting Natalie Zemon Davis, Society and Culture in Early Modern France 
(Stanford, 1975), 130. Davis makes this point with respect to the frequent performances of gender 
inversion that occurred in festivals of early modern Europe 130. 
38. Sollid, 80. 
39. Ray, 88. 
40. Judith Butler, Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (New York and 
London, 1990), 25. 
41. Butler, 24. 
42. Marjorie Garber, Vested Interests: Cross-Dressing and Cultural Anxiety (New York, 1992), 
40. 
43. Smith-Rosenberg, 115. 
44. Clark, 17. 
45. In a museum that houses some of the most well-known Western art and memorabilia, this 
absence was really quite startling. Even in the gift shop, there was only one small pamphlet on 
Calamity. 
46. Autumn Stephens, Wild Women (Berkeley, 1992); Ronald Dean Miller, Shady Ladies of the 
37 
 West (Louisiana, 1964); Duncan Aikman, Calamity Jane and the Lady Wildcats, (New York, 1927); 
Wily Women of the West and Desperate Women have already been cited. Though considered by many 
to not be "serious" biographies, these works, which span sixty-five years, nevertheless reveal a good 
deal about the attitudes of Calamity's contemporaries; indeed, they express those attitudes them­
selves. Moreover, I think the fact that these women supposedly did not inspire "serious" biographies, 
that works about them are usually considered to be sensationalized, is telling in and of itself. 
47. Hickock, letters. 
48. Hickock, letters. 
49. In Private Woman, Public Stage: Literary Domesticity in Nineteenth-Century America 
(New York and Oxford, 1984), Mary Kelly argues this point with respect to the Domestic Novelists, 
who while writing of the private sphere published and earned a reputation in the public. See also 
Christine Stansell, City of Women: Sex and Class in New York, 1789-1860 (Urbana and Chicago, 
1987). Stansell argues something similar through an analysis of the lives of working-class women, 
who by definition put that dichotomy into question. 
50. Felicity A. Nussbaum, The Autobiographical Subject: Gender and Ideology in Eighteenth 
Century England (Baltimore and London, 1989), 7. 
51. Martha J. Burk, Life and Adventures of Calamity Jane: byHerself (Fairfield, 1969). The first 
edition was published in 1896, but neither the date nor the publisher and place of publication are 
mentioned. 
52. Jane Tompkins, West of Everything: The Inner Life of Westerns (New York and Oxford, 
1992), 58. 
53. Sidonie Smith, A Poetics of Women's Autobiography: Marginality and the 
Fictions of Self-Representation (Bloomington and Indianapolis, 1990), 8. 
54. Sidonie Smith, 8. 
55. For more on this see Carroll Smith-Rosenberg, Disorderly Conduct; Alan Sekula, "The 
Body and the Archive," 39 October (Winter 1986), 3-64; Donna Haraway, "Teddy Bear Patriarchy," 
26-59; Gerald Graff, Professing Literature: An Institutional History (Chicago and London, 1987). 
56. Smith-Rosenberg, 40. 
57. Paul Smith, "Discerning the Subject," 55 Theory and History of Literature (Minneapolis, 
1988) xxxv. 
58. What specifically troubles me is that Garber's comments about Calamity seem to be based 
only on secondary sources. First, Calamity did not cross-dress her entire life. Secondly, to make the 
point that transvestism is usually attributed to necessity and not desire, Garber inaccurately suggests 
that Calamity's reasons for wearing men's clothes had nothing to do with necessity. And this suggests 
more generally that despite her efforts to explain the transvestite as that which is uncategorizable, she, 
herself, is guilty of such categorizing. 
59. Garber, 16-17. 
60. Wheeler, DeadwoodDick on Deck, 18. 
61. Horan, 172. 
62. Joan Wallach Scott, Gender and the Politics of History (New York, 1988), 178. 
38 
