Constructing Indigeneity: Postcolonial 
Dynamics in Charles Brockden Brown's 
Monthly Magazine and American Review 
Steven Frye 
Charles Brockden Brown was the first professional author in the United 
States, one of the early lights in the tradition of the American novel, and the 
founder and major contributor to a number of early American periodicals such 
as The Monthly Magazine and American Review and The Literary Magazine and 
American Register. In this regard, he provides a gauge of the conflicts, tensions, 
and issues that characterize American culture in the decades following the 
Revolutionary War. Brown was born in Philadelphia in 1771 in the midst of 
increasing political conflict. The son of Quaker parents, he experienced both 
religious training and exposure to the practical realities of eighteenth-century 
urban mercantile culture. His father, Elijah, entertained radical political sympa­
thies, but like other Quakers he did not actively support the Revolution. The 
family business suffered as a result, and Brown grew up in an environment where 
both Christian and political idealism clashed in a conflict of ambivalent values. 
Brown reached early adolescence as the war came to a close, and after an 
education in law he embarked upon the precarious career as a man of letters. His 
literary efforts lasted for about a decade—from 1792 to 1802—a period 
following the constitutional crisis between Federalists and Anti-Federalists, but 
a time still reflecting many of its ideological tensions. Brown's editorial work 
in The Monthly Magazine and American Review reflects the temper of the age, 
mirroring the uncertainty of a nation split by political battles and party faction, 
by the conflicts that naturally arise as a new nation attempts to construct a 
cultural identity through the appropriation and modification of imperial influ­
ences. 
0026-3079/98/3903-069$2.00/0 American Studies, 39:3 (Fall 1998): 69-88 
69 
 70 Steven Frye 
Figure 1: Portrait of Charles Brockden Brown by James Sharpies, circa 
January 1798. (Provided courtesy of the Worcester Art Museum, Worces­
ter, Massachusetts.) 
Critics and literary historians have debated Brown's politics and social 
philosophy. Scholars in the 1950s and 1960s point to the influence of Godwinian 
social radicalism. William Godwin (1756-1836) was the father of Mary Shelley 
and husband of Mary Wollstonecraft.l He was an anarchist and foundational 
influence for romantic poets such as William Wordsworth, Samuel Taylor 
Coleridge, and Percy Bysshe Shelley. Godwin argued that human beings were 
creatures of environment and that governmental institutions were inherently 
corrupt. In 1950, Lulu Rumsey Wiley traced the influence of Godwin's ideas on 
Brown's gothic romances.2 Donald Ringe referred to the influence of Godwin in 
 Constructing Indigeneity 71 
his 1966 study of Brown's works. Also in 1966, Warner Berthoff wrote that 
"When Brockden Brown, erstwhile Godwinian, abandoned the novel and turned 
to political journalism, this, broadly speaking, was the point of view he instinc­
tively adopted."3 But critics also observe a dissonant, more conservative perspec­
tive. In the same article, Berthoff argued that Brown's editorial sympathies were 
also strongly influenced by an "enlightened conservatism."4 The exploration of 
Brown's implicit conservatism, his support of Federalist politics, his antipathy to 
the Jefferson administration, continues among recent critics. Shirley Samuels 
reacts against the assumption that Brown was uniformly radical, stating that 
"underlying his more radical gothic sensibilities is a rather conservative concen­
tration on education and the family—a concentration which anticipates the focus 
on the family in succeeding American novels."5 
This critical debate suggests that a persistent ambivalence regarding political 
issues informs Brown's literary efforts, creating a conflict of sensibility that 
appears not only in his fiction but also in his editorial work. William Hedges 
points to the "ambivalence of his political feelings—his joint attraction to and fear 
of radical utopianism."6 This conflict leads to a dramatic tension that strengthens 
and empowers Brown's use of the gothic mode in novels such as Wieland and 
Edgar Huntly, which is a concern specific to literary critics and Brown scholars 
in particular. But upon close scrutiny these tensions are pertinent to cultural 
historians, theorists, and Americanists in general. Brown's ambivalent views on 
political and social matters reflect a broader conflict in late eighteenth- and early 
nineteenth-century American culture as a whole. The popular journalistic litera­
ture of the new nation, as contained in The Monthly Magazine and American 
Review, provides an invaluable guide to the political and epistemological per­
spectives that existed in the American early national period. During this era, the 
cultural phenomena theorized as "postcoloniality" are clearly operative, as 
Brown's literary efforts reveal noticeable conflicts between the hegemonic 
discourses of the imperial power and the emerging counter-narratives of the new 
nation. 
Many theorists have characterized American literature as "postcolonial," but 
working critics have too often ignored this assertion. Applications of postcolonial 
theories have been largely limited to dialect studies in "local color" fiction.7 
Although some critics, such as Lawrence Buell and Janet Gabler-Hover, resist the 
notion of postcoloniality in early American texts, the cultural and political 
situation in America during Brown's time, the last three decades of the eighteenth 
century and the first decade of the nineteenth century, mirrors in specific ways the 
regions and nationalities that recent postcolonial theorists explore. In a remark­
able study entitled The Empire Writes Back: Theory and Practice in Postcolonial 
Literatures, Bill Ashcroft, Gareth Griffiths, and Helen Tiffin provide a useful 
descriptive study of postcolonial regions and literatures. These theorists distin­
guish between two different kinds of colonies: the "native" colony, the region 
where the colonizer establishes political and economic dominance over indig­
enous populations, and the "settler" colony, where the colonial settler, while 
 72 Steven Frye 
alienating, suppressing, and controlling native peoples and remaining tenuously 
linked to Europe, establishes a political independence while struggling for 
cultural autonomy separate from the colonizer.8 These two forms of colonial 
arrangement affect the historical process of cultural development. Ashcroft, 
Griffiths, and Tiffin point to America as a site of postcolonial dynamics: 
. . . the literatures of African countries, Australia, Bangladesh, 
Canada, Caribbean countries, India, Malaysia, Malta, New 
Zealand, Pakistan, Singapore, South Pacific Island countries, 
and Sri Lanka are all post-colonial literatures. The literature of 
the USA should also be placed in this category. Perhaps 
because of its current position of power, and the neo-colonizing
role it has played, its post-colonial nature has not been 
generally recognized. But its relationship to the metropolitan 
centre as it evolved over the last two centuries has been 
paradigmatic for post-colonial literatures everywhere.9 
American literature quite clearly manifests all the features of the settler 
colony, displaying the same cultural processes of regions more universally 
recognized as postcolonial. D. E. S. Maxwell cites the United States as the 
prototypical postcolonial situation, a region displaying the basic features of the 
settler colonies of Canada, New Zealand, and Australia.10 These countries, as well 
as various Latin American countries in their early years of nationhood and 
independence, involve a crisis of identity, as they attempt to construct indigenous 
cultures through the process of appropriation, abrogation, and syncreticity. The 
appropriation of colonial influence—in politics, art, literature, philosophy—the 
abrogation or rejection of other aspects of colonial culture, as well as the 
combination of colonial and native influence, typify the postcolonial situation in 
the settler colony. Ashcroft, Griffiths, and Tiffin mention Brown specifically, 
stating that "the works of Charles Brockden Brown in the United States provide 
excellent examples of such a conflict."11 
Brown's editorial selections in The Monthly Magazine and American Review 
reveal a crisis of identity typical of an author both inscribed within yet marginalized 
by a dominant literary and cultural tradition. In Kenneth Dauber's terms, Brown's 
work was "unsure of itself from the beginning," and was primarily concerned 
with its own nature, its own identity as a historically and geographically specific 
cultural production.12 Brown was torn between a tendency to appropriate English 
political ideals, epistemological systems, and social values, and a desire to 
abrogate the influence of the imperial power, thereby reconstituting his emerging 
culture through an identity rooted in "place."13 
This is a discursive phenomenon common in the postcolonial context. It is 
manifest in the work of Irish writers such as W. B. Yeats, James Joyce, Seamus 
Heaney, and Stewart Parker, as well as in the work of Indian authors such as R. 
K. Narayan and the Trinidadian V. S. Naipaul. Like these writers, Brown's 
 Constructing Indigeneity 73 
literary efforts provide important insights into a new and emerging literary and 
cultural consciousness, a consciousness that reflects precisely the same conflicts 
and contradictions that have historically appeared among settler colonies world­
wide. To apprehend these conflicts and contradictions, selections from The 
Monthly Magazine must be precisely and carefully analyzed, but they must first 
be situated within the cultural context of postcolonialism. This essay will 
therefore involve a discussion of 1) American historical context and 
postcolonialism; and 2) discourse and counter-discourse in The Monthly Maga­
zine. 
I 
Before beginning an analysis of the discursive conflicts in Brown's editorial 
work, it is necessary to situate the texts within a cultural moment, not within the 
"objective" world of a history previously received, but within a history re­
configured by the concerns of postcolonial theorists.14 Albert Memmi suggests 
that any writer in the postcolonial realm must be considered as an artist situated 
within a special world, an environment characterized by the cultural influences 
of the colonizer, yet a world that constructs the postcolonial artist in a manner 
influenced by "place," by a specific set of cultural influences that emanate from 
historical, political, geographical, and intellectual factors.15 The sense of dis­
placement typical of people living in a postcolonial situation, the simultaneous 
attachment to an unfamiliar place and an oddly familiar yet still somehow foreign 
cultural tradition, is precisely the experience reflected in Brown's social world. 
The political discourse and ideology of Brown's time was defined by earlier 
European thinkers such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau and John Locke, but it was 
expressed and reconsidered in an American context by political figures like 
Thomas Jefferson. Jefferson was an older contemporary of Brown who wrote 
during Brown's youth. Upon close inspection Jefferson himself expressed some 
of the paradoxical attitudes associated with the developing identity of the settler 
colony. Egalitarian revolutionary though he was, Jefferson in Notes on the State 
of Virginia (1785) displays an aristocratic sensibility directly appropriated from 
the European colonizer. He expresses an ambivalence and fear of the liberties 
achieved through revolutionary conflict. Jefferson contemplated the fragility 
inherent in democracy and the transience of the individualistic fervor upon which 
a people's government depends. He suggested that the values that fueled the 
Revolution must be codified while a humane temper still remained. Even 
democracy could not protect the masses from their own complacency and from 
political corruption. 
Implicit in Jefferson's political ambivalence is a respect for European 
intellectual culture coupled oddly with a desire to create a new nation in a new and 
distinctive landscape. The anxiety characteristic of this situation is central to the 
work of the Trinidadian postcolonial writer, V. S. Naipaul, particularly in The 
Mimic Men. Through his narrator Kripal Singh, Naipaul explores the tension 
 74 Steven Frye 
inherent in the postcolonial writer between the competing ideologies of imperial 
metropolitan "center" and colonial "margin." As he recalls his early school lesson 
about the "weight" of the king's crown, Singh creates a contrast between the order 
created through colonizing culture and the disorder that characterizes not only the 
social world but also the consciousness of the postcolonial subject. While Naipaul 
displays keen insight into this power/language/order nexus, he remains oddly 
attracted to the ideologies of the colonizer, even though they construct his culture 
as nothingness and disorder.16 In America, this attraction and split consciousness 
is apparent in Jefferson, and it found its way further into the political sphere, 
leading to the final phase of polemical writing of the Revolutionary era that 
informed Brown as a youth, resulting in The Federalist Papers. These polemics 
appeared in the New York newspapers between October 1787 and April 1788 and 
were written by Alexander Hamilton, John Jay, and James Madison. The essays 
contain a clear and lucid analysis and assertion of Federalism and the separation 
of powers, and they further theorize the distinction between direct and represen­
tative democracy. They reflect an anxiety about the limits, practicability, and 
purpose of the new American democracy, displaying an attraction to European 
imperial and aristocratic culture. Here the postcolonial dynamics of empire and 
nationhood are central to the very debates that characterize the early national 
period. 
These political conflicts were augmented in Brown's time by philosophical 
debates that dealt specifically with epistemology. Questions about the nature and 
validity of knowledge were at the center of the European enlightenment, and the 
epistemological questions that preoccupied the American intelligentsia did not 
originate on this continent. But whenever a people achieve political independence 
in a new place, their first problem becomes how to incorporate that place into a 
known frame of reference. Questions related to how one "knows" the new region, 
how one "knows" one's place within it, become immediate and crucial. Intensi­
fied epistemological conflicts are characteristic of the postcolonial situation, and 
certain rifts, junctures, and subtle differences can be observed between colonizer 
and colonized. 
This heightened concern with epistemological issues is often expressed by 
postcolonial writers in varying degrees of subversiveness. As Ashcroft, Griffiths 
and Tiffin suggest: "in the questions post-colonial texts posed, in their radical 
attempts to address the issues of language, reality, and their inherited and now 
troubling epistemological assumptions, there was a necessary subversive ele­
ment."17 There is always a political and social dimension to any process of 
epistemological questioning. As Edward Said writes: "No one has ever devised 
a method for detaching the scholar from the circumstances of life, from the fact 
of his involvement (conscious or unconscious) with a class, a set of beliefs, a 
social position, or from the mere activity of being a member of a society."18 The 
political dynamics typical of the postcolonial situation in America affected in 
noticeable ways the stances American authors such as Brown took on the 
philosophical issues related to the creation of knowledge.19 
 Constructing Indigeneity 75 
The eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries in America can be seen as a 
period which evolved from a theologically based set of epistemological systems, 
such as Quakerism and Calvinism, to Deism and the empiricist skepticism of the 
Enlightenment period.20 In considering Brown's work, Roland Hagenbiichle 
complicates this by observing the influence of David Hume (1711-1776). Hume 
was the British philosopher, historian, and economist who wrote A Treatise of 
HumanNature (1739,1740) and An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding 
(1758), among other works. He called into question aspects of Lockean epistemology
in his criticism of causality. Causal relationships among perceived 
objects in the natural world were not verifiable in the objects themselves but were 
observed by human minds and conditioned by the habits and natural processes of 
those minds. Causal relationships were understood not through observation and 
perception alone but by habitual association and custom. While early nineteenthcentury
English novelists rely on Locke's epistemological optimism, Brown's 
work in America tends to reflect Hume's skepticism, his attack on causality and 
substance.21 
The circumstances that focused these issues for Brown in America evolved 
out of the political debates of the Federalists and Anti-Federalists. Though the 
debates had ended on the floor of Congress by the time Brown came of age as a 
man of letters, the contested issues remained central to American politics until the 
Civil War. The constitutional crisis of the 1780s revolved implicitly around 
epistemological assumptions regarding the validity of human perception. Humean 
skepticism, the critique of objective causality (which accounts to some degree for 
Brown's later Federalist sensibilities), must call into question the public's 
capacity to analyze and understand their own cultural circumstances, and thereby 
implicitly challenges the notion of egalitarian democracy. What characterizes 
these conflicts is a preoccupation and attraction typical of the settler colony with 
colonial influence in the realm of speculative philosophy. But what further 
characterizes these debates is the heightened preoccupation with epistemological 
questions that often appear in postcolonial societies, together with the initial signs 
of juncture and difference, reflected in subversiveness, that lead to new cultural 
identity through appropriation, abrogation, and syncreticity. Political indepen­
dence does little to relieve the crisis of identity of the settler colony, a crisis that 
finds dramatic expression in the world of ideas, in debates revolving around 
epistemological questions. 
These are some of the tensions that appear in Brown's work. As William 
Hedges suggests, Brown was "forced to borrow essentially alien narrative 
devices and situations" and he was "able to adapt them to native conditions only 
imperfectly." Yet like Yeats, Naipaul, and Narayan, he is instrumental in 
establishing a new native tradition in the context of the settler colony, since "He 
is credited with being the first to sense the peculiar suitability of such derivative 
and discredited fictional forms as romance and melodrama to what are more and 
more alleged to be the deepest American impulses."22 Of course critics through-
 76 Steven Frye 
out the twentieth century have recognized these conflicts in Brown. Richard 
Chase paraphrased Marius Bewley, who discusses the "opposition between 
tradition and progress or between the past and the future; between Europe and 
America, liberalism and reaction, aggressive acquisitive economics and benevo­
lent wealth."23 But with the advent of cultural studies and postcolonial theory, 
which became truly widespread among literary scholars in the late 1970s, we can 
see that these tensions reflect the broader social phenomenon referred to as 
postcolonialism. To echo the ideas of Maria Bulgheroni, Brown's modernity, his 
prototypical existential alienation, display similar sensibilities to colonized 
peoples worldwide.24 
II 
An analysis of periodicals such as Brown's Monthly Magazine and American 
Review is particularly revealing when considering the American postcolonial 
situation. A study of his primary texts such as Wieland and Edgar Huntly reveals 
an interesting amalgam of hegemonic and counter-discursive elements. But the 
author's attempt to produce works of artistic merit lead to a necessary focus on 
form, genre, style, and language. In addition, as Richard Terdiman asserts in his 
analysis of nineteenth-century French literature, the literature of any postcolonial 
period often defines the condition of its existence as counter-discursive, and, in 
designating itself as oppositional, it marginalizes itself and does not lend itself to 
a ready identification of the mainstream hegemonic discourses that function 
within the culture.25 
To seize and understand the dominant discursive patterns is a complicated 
process, and to grasp these patterns one must move outside the realm of high 
culture. Popular periodicals offer a more fruitful area of analysis, since by 
necessity they directly reflect the social and political climate. Terdiman, in his 
discussion of early nineteenth-century French newspapers, stated that in their 
"ubiquity," in their tendency toward the banal, commercial presses functioned as 
a medium for the dominant ideas of a culture.26 
In the late eighteenth century in America, the periodical was a comparatively 
new literary form. In its identity as a "popular" or "commercial" literature, and 
in its effort to appeal directly to its audience, this literature functioned to reflect 
the enigmatic and complicated cultural demographics of the American postcolonial 
situation. Like the newspaper in Terdiman's analysis, American periodicals 
manifested the "dynamics of resistance," reflecting both hegemonic and counterdiscursive
narrative elements. As a new form yet to be fully appropriated by high 
culture, these journals reflected a multiplicity of cultural voices. (Brown in fact 
singlehandedly wrote much of The Monthly Magazine, but his own conflicting 
political and theological sensibilities and his desire to create a successful journal 
led to the heterogenous nature of the various selections). In the first two issues of 
The Monthly Magazine and American Review, published in April and May, 1799, 
these various viewpoints become apparent in Brown's selection of non-fiction 
and polemic materials, didactic and moral essays, and informal epistolary pieces. 
 Constructing Indigeneity 77 
Conflicting perspectives in the inaugural issue first become apparent in the 
epistle entitled "Original Communications" (April 1799) in which a "CANDIDUS" 
criticizes Brown's aims for the periodical (Dunlap, in his early biography of 
Brown, suggests that CANDIDUS is probably Brown himself). This criticism 
points to the conflicts and contradictions in the editorial position Brown adopts, 
and in it Brown pokes fun at his own conflicted sensibilities. In reminding the 
editor of "an old fable of a farmer," CANDIDUS warns Brown that "in his 
eagerness to please all, he displeased every body, and, most of all, himself "27 
CANDIDUS refers to Brown's apparent egalitarian sensibilities, his desire to 
produce a publication that responds to an audience that includes people of all 
classes, tastes, values, and occupations. The author of the epistle asserts that the 
TUB 
MONTHLY MAGAZINE, 
AMD 
AMERICAN REVIEW, 
raR THE YEAR 
1 7 9 9 = 
FROM APRIL TO DECEMBER INCLUSIVE. 
Fimfu etfùrit undo. 
V i t c n . 
VOL. L 
W 
N E W - Y O R K » 
PrifltfJiadfoMbjT.«t J.SWORJDS, K* 99 PotMtfcM. 
iSoo. 
Figure 2: Title page of the inclusive 1799 issue of The Monthly Mag­
azine and American Review, edited by Charles Brockden Brown, printed 
by T & J Swords. 
 78 Steven Frye 
"disciples of all the professions, the students of all the sciences, the lovers of 
literature and poetry," are invited to Brown's "banquet."28 
Certainly, one of Brown's primary goals is the financial success of his 
journal. But in conceiving of a publication that will achieve this success, he 
apparently embraces a rather egalitarian view of his audience. Brown would 
certainly not expect a tradesman or a farmer to purchase a journal that is too 
general in nature, and as such addresses their concerns in a severely limited way. 
Brown seems to believe that these people must possess, in addition to their 
utilitarian concerns, an interest in literature, poetry, and the empirical sciences. 
Conversely, people of "taste," whose central interests are intellectual, must also 
be concerned with the problems and issues that confront the merchant and 
working classes. Brown seems to assume a consistency of taste and values in his 
audience, reflecting the historically specific values of one segment of the 
population during the early national period. In attempting to "appeal to all," 
Brown's egalitarian sensibilities lead him to normalize the audience, investing 
the "all" with the values, interests, and merits of divergent cultural and social 
groups. 
These sentiments must be contextualized considering the political and social 
debates that were occurring in America at the time. Brown, though he later 
became a Federalist, seems clearly influenced in this piece by Jeffersonian 
politics and the egalitarian social principles and assumptions Jefferson supported. 
But one can also observe here what so many critics have observed elsewhere— 
the appropriation of European thought, in the influence of the radical social 
philosophy of William Godwin (who through Brown's father was in some sense 
the hero of Brown's youth).29 
Godwin subverts the notion that humanity in its fallen state must submit to 
social authority and government. The contrary is in fact true. Human beings are 
corrupted by the manipulations and artifices of any socially constructed institu­
tion. It follows then that the ideologies implicit in those institutions, whether 
political or epistemological, function to re-constitute individuals, bringing them 
from a "natural" to a social state of being. Godwin's early romanticism and 
radicalism becomes manifest in Brown's egalitarian sensibility. By implication, 
Godwin celebrates the egalitarian ideals of agrarianism and the lower classes, 
who are not constructed socially out of institutional values. Brown's tendency to 
normalize his audience reflects both romantic and radical sentiments (appropri­
ated largely from European social philosophy) as well as the essential principles 
of Jeffersonian politics that were operative in America at the time. 
Brown's editorial intentions, however, are not consistent in this regard. His 
skepticism of "liberty," which becomes so apparent in Wieland and other of his 
works, appears also as CANDDDUS continues his epistolary response to Brown. 
The editor apparently intends to "speculate on the manners and morals in the style 
of Addison and Johnson." In this intention there is no direct adherence to the elitist 
and aristocratic principles these writers support and defend. But considering 
Brown's well-noted skepticism of pure "liberty," his desire to appropriate the 
 Constructing Indigeneity 79 
"styles" of European models reveals an attraction to the colonizing culture. This 
becomes apparent because Brown promises to "extract the quintessence of 
European wisdom; to review and estimate the labors of all writers, domestic and 
foreign; to exercise, by turns, the pencils of Richardson and Tacitus."30 The 
editor's attraction to the wisdom of antiquity betrays a faith in the political and 
epistemological systems of a more aristocratic segment of the European intelli­
gentsia, viewpoints that are fundamentally anti-egalitarian in nature. The epistle 
of CANDIDUS reveals in Brown a peculiar combination of conflicting values. 
These values emanate both from Europe, from the cultural circumstances in early 
America, and from Brown's urban world. Philadelphia was the center of the 
political debate that attempted to bring order to the chaos of the American 
postcolonial era. In this environment, aristocratic and egalitarian principles, 
shaped into discourses by literature, oratory, and debate, struggled to re-consti­
tute the new nation. Thus Brown's editorial intentions reflect the tensions of an 
American postcolonial situation. 
These tensions are quite similar to those expressed by the contemporary 
postcolonial Indian author, R. K. Narayan, whose The Vendor of the Streets is 
deeply rooted in native traditions but embodies an irony clearly based in modern 
British literature. Irony is in fact central to the work. The novel tells the story of 
a shopkeeper, Jagan, and his complex relationship with his society's rituals and 
traditions, which are complicated by his son Mali, who is determined to modern­
ize them. In his home, Jagan has a portrait of the District Tax Collector. Children 
pull the picture from its frame, make fun of the image within it, and finally leave 
it amongst the family junk pile. 
This novel could be viewed as a comic attack on colonial influence. But 
Narayan directs an irony typical of modern British authors at Indian traditional 
institutions as well, specifically through Mali. In The Vendor in the Streets, the 
voice and style of the colonizer act upon issues and traditions drawn from native 
materials. British and native Indian traditions reflect divergent political values, 
yet both inform the complex texture of Narayan's novel. Like the CANDIDUS 
piece, the author's perspective is split and hybridized, both stylistically and 
thematically. 
In The Monthly Magazine and American Review, an epistemological conflict 
that characterized the intellectual environment of the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries is outlined in an essay entitled "Parallels between Hume, Robertson, 
and Gibbon" (May 1799). The author of this piece establishes these intellectuals 
as representative of three related but separate epistemological views and asserts 
that "the studious or lettered part of mankind may, at present, be divided into two 
sects, one of which is friendly, and the other hostile to religion."31 After locating 
the epistemological conflict in relation to theology, and establishing Christianity 
as the frame of reference for intellectual debate, the author outiines the compo­
nents of the confrontation. 
Edward Gibbon (1737-1794) was the British historian who wrote the 
monumental work The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire 
 80 Steven Frye 
(1776, 1781, 1788). He explained the "origin and progress of the Christian 
system" and in the process of doing so he "attacked the truth of this system with 
the dangerous weapons of sarcasm and irony."32 Hume, on the other hand, while 
sympathetic to Gibbon's views, approached the problem from a more radical 
point of view. He was "led by his nature into somewhat different tracts" as he was 
"the enemy, not of any particular form of religion, but of religion itself."33 David 
Hume's thinking becomes important when considering the epistemological 
issues both in other pieces within the journal and in Wieland. But in his selection 
of this piece, Brown simply challenges a dominant theological perspective, and 
becomes party to an intense debate which deals openly with epistemological 
issues. 
The author continues this process as he discusses William Robertson (17211793),
the Scottish historian and Presbyterian minister who wrote History of 
Scotland during the Reigns of Queen Mary and of James VI until his Accession 
to the Crown of England, (1759), History of the Reign of Emperor Charles the 
Fifth (1769), and History of America (1788). Robertson approaches the newly 
acknowledged "problem" of religion by performing a kind of late eighteenthcentury
version of cultural criticism. Robertson distinguishes between the "sub­
stance" and "semblance" of religion, pointing out that the culture specific 
prejudices of individual societies, the "ignorance and ambition of the middle 
ages,"34 led to the misinterpretation of Christian precepts. 
The ideas of all three men were central to the theological conflicts which 
were occurring during the Enlightenment period. Gibbon provided a historical 
account of the rise of Christianity and in the process launched a pointed critique 
of Christianity. Hume, in his response to Lockean empiricism, criticized the 
assumption of objective causality upon which all religions were based. Robertson, 
more moderate in his thinking, preserved in his system of thought an "ideal" 
Christianity, but criticized the various forms, expressions, and doctrinal misinter­
pretations that evolved as a result of socialization processes. 
The theological conflicts represented by these three figures exist within the 
context of a larger conflict of epistemological views, and Brown's selection of 
this piece reflects his concern for what in the American postcolonial era has 
become epistemological "crisis." The thinking of Hume, Robertson, and Gibbon 
on the issue of religion was reflected and amplified in Brown's time. America was 
a site of intense theological conflicts that were fueled by the rising emphasis on 
empiricism and the epistemological debates that occurred as a result, and these 
concerns had a significant affect on the formation of cultural values. In Democ­
racy in America, Alexis de Tocqueville commented on the relationship between 
religion and American cultural identity 
It must never be forgotten that religion gave birth to AngloAmerican
society. In the United States, religion is therefore 
mingled with all the habits of the nation and all the feelings of 
Patriotism, whence it derives a peculiar force In the United 
 Constructing Indigeneity 81 
States, Christian sects are infinitely diversified and perpetually 
modified; but Christianity itself is an established and irresist­
ible fact. . . ,35 
American Puritanism, in its purest form, had perhaps taken its last gasp with 
the Great Awakening. America was still, however, an intensely religious nation. 
The Quakers remained influential in Brown's home city of Philadelphia. Through­
out the eighteenth century, vast numbers of Scotch-Irish Presbyterians migrated 
into the Delaware Valley and into the Appalachian hill country. In the 1790s and 
into the nineteenth century, the Second Great Awakening emerged among 
Baptists and Methodists, especially in the southern backcountry and the Old 
Southwest regions of Kentucky, Tennessee, and Missouri. This renewed reli­
gious fervor involved a new revivalism, typified by charismatic and emotionbased
preaching styles and various forms of "enthusiasm," all of which became 
essential characteristics of American Protestantism throughout the nineteenth 
and twentieth centuries.36 
As a counterpoint to this phenomenon, the New England Unitarians were 
becoming a significant force, perhaps not in numbers so much as in intellectual 
and cultural influence. In 1803, upon the death of David Tappan, a moderate 
Calvinist and Hollis Professor of Divinity, a power struggle ensued for control of 
Harvard. Upon the election of Henry Ware for President of Harvard in 1805, the 
Unitarians became a dominant voice among the American eastern intelligentsia. 
The Unitarians were sympathetic to Enlightenment thought, particularly Lockean 
empiricism, but were anxious also to discover and maintain an epistemological 
basis for religion in the face of secularization. To do so, they appropriated the 
influence of empiricism and the philosophical paradigms being established by the 
Scottish Common Sense Philosophers.37 In basic philosophical and theological 
perspective, these Unitarians became in part the basis of New England Transcen­
dentalism, which was defined and advanced by Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry 
David Thoreau, Margaret Fuller, Bronson Alcott, Theodore Parker, W. E. 
Channing, and later Walt Whitman. In turn, Unitarianism became a point of 
commentary and contemplation for writers such as Nathaniel Hawthorne and 
Herman Melville. 
The discussions of Gibbon, Robertson, and Hume, all focusing on the 
epistemological basis for religion in general and Christianity in particular, were 
important to the people of the emerging nation-state of the late eighteenth and 
early nineteenth centuries. In the American context, "crisis" occurred because 
this conflict of theological systems and epistémes was exacerbated by a lack of 
social and cultural definition, by the aforementioned political conflicts and 
debates that fragmented the early nation. What in the old world were the normal 
conflicts associated with the evolution of thought became in the American settler 
colony crucial issues to resolve in the process of constructing an indigenous 
cultural and political identity. 
 82 Steven Frye 
This conflict could be observed in much of the European literature of the 
period, and certainly one cannot claim that the epistemological conflict was 
uniquely American. But again, the postcolonial situation in the new nation 
functions to transform an epistemological "dilemma" into a "crisis." Edward Said 
suggests that no system of knowledge can be produced independently of its 
author's involvement in historical and cultural circumstances, and he also 
suggests that there is an important political dimension to any dominant discourse, 
whether epistemological or otherwise.38 Brown's preoccupation with materials 
that portray these conflicting systems of knowledge reflects the political and 
cultural concerns of early America. 
In an indirect manner, voices within this epistemological debate challenged 
the notions of human nature expressed by Thomas Paine, John Locke, and 
Thomas Jefferson, notions upon which the Declaration of Independence and the 
Revolution itself were based. The debate that had raged between Federalists and 
Anti-Federalists regarding the structure of government was at least in part 
informed by assumptions regarding humanity in general. Before adhering to the 
ideal of liberty or authority, one must in some sense resolve the epistemological 
dilemma. Can we rely upon individuals to interpret reality in an effective manner? 
How much faith can we place upon the individual? Or should systems be 
constructed and authority exercised such that society is protected from the 
"apparitions" that are witnessed through the inherent flaws in the individual 
consciousness? All these questions suggest that the eighteenth- and nineteenthcentury
"crisis in epistemology" is inseparable from the political, social, and 
cultural issues that were of central concern to the new nation. The epistemological 
questions that critics such as Roland Hagenbuchle have observed in Brown's 
work emanate from Brown's desire to establish a basis upon which we can 
"know" the new land, from his desire to codify an epistéme. In The Archeology 
of Knowledge and Discipline and Punish, Michel Foucault argues that knowledge 
and political arrangements are interdependent, that both are the basis of culture. 
As epistemological questions are appropriated into an early American context, 
they begin to take on a different character, becoming crucial issues that must be 
resolved in the process of constructing an indigenous cultural identity. Thus, 
epistemological issues had particular political implications in the American 
postcolonial situation. 
Another selection in The Monthly Magazine, a. brief essay entitled "Parallel 
Between New-England and Great Britain," (April 1799) directly addresses these 
circumstances. The piece is written in epistolary form, and reflects contradictory 
impulses on the part of the author, a desire at once to identify with and to 
distinguish between the new nation and its imperial ancestor. The author begins 
with a comparison, by reminding the reader of "that portion of our country called 
New England,"39 which in appearance resembles Great Britain, "of which it is a 
sort of daughter."40 In comparing the two locales, the author makes certain 
observations that reveal more about his own conflicting impulses than about the 
places themselves. Certain of the observations are highly questionable. The 
 Constructing Indigeneity 83 
THE 
MONTHLY MAGAZINE, 
AND 
AMERICAN REVIEW. 
Vfc.. I.] APRIL, 1799. [No. 1. 
ORIGINAL COMMUMUAllOm. 
O*PBI I O D I C AL P U B L I C A T I O N S , By the variety and multiplicity of 
«j-,i r . f /• 1 %r .it mr yourobjeâs, you seem aware that 
TitUEAtrtfAtMribUq***. ^ m^Cx^ o f t few wiU DOt 
Si a, answer your purpose, and, what is 
YO U bave undertaken, it seems, much more questionable^ you seem 
to amuse the .world with à to think that the taste of all may be 
monthly publication. 1 hope you gratified. The disciples of all the 
have well considered the difficulties professions* the students, of all the 
that lie in your way, and have not sciences, the lovers of literature and 
forgotten the old fable of the farmer poetry, are confidently invited to 
and his ass. In his eagerness to your banquet. You promise to explease
all, he displeased every body, traâ the quintessence of European. 
and, most of all, himself, since his wisdom; t o review and estimate the 
adventure terminated in the drown» labours of all writers, domestic and 
ing of his poor beast. lanYfaf from foreign ; to~éjcërcisê,~ by turns, the 
thinking that your publication will. pencils of Richardson and Tacitus; 
deserve the fate of the ass; but I am to exhibit-truly, scrutinize the 
much afraid that such a fate will causes, and deduce, the consequences 
befall it. of contemporary events; to adorn, 
When we lay out to secure the with'thecolours of fanfcy, the mèapprobation
of a few, "or of a pari morable revolutions of public and 
ticular class, our efforts may chance private life; and • to speculate oh 
to succeed.4 N o man perfectly a- manners and morals in the style of 
grecs, in taste and opinions, with Addison and Johnson. • You have 
another; but there is a general agree- promised all this ; butjpu. W*M ex* 
ment between many. The occupa- cuse me if I question your po^er to 
tions and pursuits which engage the perform it. I f you had the power, 
attention of mankind, if they were you would, ^indeed, be more wise 
numbered and distributed, might' and more fortunate than the rest of 
amount to some scores. Each of mankind. That all this should be 
these has its votaries, and there are accomplished by your flwn efforts, 
some who will listen with curiosity is chimerical : that your friends and 
and pleasure to topics connecccd correspondents should supply defiwith
each of these. ciencies, is almost as much so. 
V O L ' I . N o . x. A 
Figure 3: Introductory page to "Original Communications," from the April 
1799 issue, written by CANDIDUS, who is most probably Brown himself. 
statement asserting that "the area, or superficial extent of each, was examined, 
and discovered to be exactly the same" suggests a desire to identify the new land 
with the old, a certain nostalgic longing to identify, physically and perhaps 
culturally, with Great Britain. The author continues with a contrast in longitude 
and latitude, continuing further with a more favorable view of the climate of New 
England. He then moves from the physical to the social realm, observing that the 
British are given over to urban life, since "one seventh of the British people reside 
in the metropolis," whereas, "as many persons are spread over the whole surface 
of New England."41 
When discussing politics, the discussion becomes more revealing. The 
author concludes that the "virtue" and "happiness" of a people depend chiefly 
upon two things, the quantity and equal distribution of knowledge and property. 
 84 Steven Frye 
Here the author's pre-disposition towards the merits of his native land become 
apparent, as the egalitarian democratic ideal appears. He reminds readers that 
"every native of new England can read and write," a fact that "cannot be said of 
the natives of Britain."42 He reminds us of the abundance of periodical literature 
that functions as a vehicle of knowledge and taste in America. The comparison 
continues with a selective review of the characteristics, merits, and shortcomings 
of each country, and as the essay proceeds the author becomes openly critical of 
the political and social problems in Great Britain. The inequitable distribution of 
property, urban problems, and various other social injustices, all function to 
negatively characterize Great Britain. These problems do not exist to the same 
degree in the new nation. The complicated discursive process typical of the 
postcolonial era appear as Brown's attachment to the old world is complicated by 
his recognition of its flaws. The hope of anew land exists simultaneously with the 
nostalgia for the old, and the conflict of political values surfaces clearly, as the 
ideals of democracy confront the notion of aristocracy. 
Sentiments similar to these emerge from other settler colonies, particularly 
Ireland. The development of Anglo-Irish culture over many centuries mirrors the 
same conflicting loyalties. Centuries of British occupation in Ireland led to the 
development of an Anglo-Irish ascendency. These Anglo-Irish represented a 
minority of the population, and their philosophical perspectives, values, and 
religious practices bore a striking resemblance to the Virginia tidewater aristo­
crats in America (many of whom were loyalists). The Anglo-Irish were largely 
but not entirely English in ancestry, and they tended to be Protestant. They were 
generally loyal to the English Crown, a loyalty expressed in the Act of Union in 
1800, when the Irish Parliament voted to unite Ireland and Britain, an act that 
effectively made all of Ireland subject to English rule. Ironically, the Act of Union 
served to eradicate the Anglo-Irish ascendency, forcing the Anglo-Irish as well 
as the Native Irish into a state of subjection. This political situation was 
exacerbated in the nineteenth century by the potato famine, mass evictions and 
forced migrations of rural folk, and the traumas of the Land War and the Fenian 
Era, all of which led to the armed struggle for independence between 1916 and 
1921. 
As the Anglo-Irish ascendency was absorbed over time into Irish culture, 
Ireland displayed sets of conflicts similar to those in America. Irish people 
recognized the necessity for independence but displayed at all levels an attach­
ment to British culture. This attachment becomes apparent in the twentieth 
century in the work of many Irish writers of Anglo-Irish descent or affiliation, 
figures such as James Joyce, W. B. Yeats, among others. These are precisely the 
conflicts that appear in "Parallel Between New-England and Great Britain." 
Toward the end of the essay the author addresses language, an issue central to the 
arguments and paradigms of most postcolonial theorists. The author's conclu­
sions regarding the political and social dimensions of language use are remark­
able for the period. In extending his ambivalent critique of Great Britain, he states 
that "the bookish, polished, or latinized Saxon, is scarcely known to one fiftieth 
 Constructing Indigeneity 85 
of the British people... ."43 The author suggests that dialect and speech signify 
social position, and he alludes to the existence of a hegemonic discourse, while 
celebrating the hope of liberation from the oppression inherent in the language of 
aristocracy. In dealing with the simultaneous attraction to colonial influence and 
desire for a new identity, he elucidates the political, cultural, social, and linguistic 
issues typical of the settler colony. 
Another epistolary piece in the April edition of The Monthly Magazine and 
American Review, entitled "On the State of American Literature" (April 1799), 
betrays the same conflict, the same attempt to establish what Emerson called an 
"original relation to the universe." In the author's desire to find merit and defend 
the literary efforts of Americans, he confesses that he tends "to approve of many 
things merely because they are American,"44 and in doing so, he demonstrates the 
impulse to extract and build, out of the confrontation of conflicting values, a new 
nation and an original cultural mythos. Authors who followed managed to 
respond to this need. Novelists such as James Fenimore Cooper, William Gilmore 
Simms, and Nathaniel Hawthorne created an American hero that responded to the 
philosophical and cultural ambiguity of the age. This hero, realized in characters 
such as Natty Bumppo and Hester Prynne, manifest a self-reliance unprecedented 
in previous literatures, an ability to function within an environment of epistemological
and theological doubt, within a social and cultural context that exists 
without the governance of a centralized political authority, a dominant epistéme, 
or a homogeneous cultural mythos. These figures are in some sense the heroes of 
Franz Fanon's separatism, agents of cultural regeneration that function indepen­
dently, natives who behave like natives, relying upon the materials of "place" 
rather than on the literary traditions and epistémes of the colonizer.45 In contem­
plating the issue of an American literary tradition, the author of this piece 
confronts the problems typical of the postcolonial situation in the settler colony, 
the need to construct an indigenous cultural ideal specific to the new land, distinct 
from the concerns of the old world.46 
Thus, Brown's literary efforts, particularly his editorial work in The Monthly 
Magazine and American Review, reflect a competing amalgam of social, politi­
cal, theological, and epistemological perspectives. The notion of the "postcolonial" 
as a cultural phenomenon helps to clarify the apparent contradictions that critics 
have observed in Brown's life and work. The politics of his later years should not 
be oversimplified, nor should they be classified under general terms such as 
"conservative" or "reactionary."47 They are a response to a unique set of conflicts 
specific to the new land, and Brown seemed to possess a remarkable awareness 
of the problems associated with individual "freedom" in the absolute. The 
epistemological issues raised by figures such as John Locke and David Hume, 
amplified further by the secularization process and a declining faith in the efficacy 
of the Quaker's "inner-light" and divine revelation, served to call into question 
the individual's ability to assimilate and evaluate experience. But this criticism 
of the individual is counteracted by the radicalism of Godwin, causing Brown to 
 86 Steven Frye 
become skeptical of the institutions that emerge from competing epistemological 
systems. Like Thomas Paine and Thomas Jefferson, Brown seemed to possess a 
faith in the "individual" divorced from institutions, and he feared the de­
humanizing power of institutional authority. His editorial work does not reflect 
a consistent vision or agenda. Instead, it manifests a system of internal contradic­
tions that function to problematize the issues central to the new nation. 
Brown possessed the peculiar sensibility of a literary figure working within 
the postcolonial settler situation, a sensibility not dissimilar to universally 
recognized postcolonial writers such as W. B. Yeats, R. K. Narayan, and V. S. 
Naipaul. With no "native" tradition to draw from, he worked with the intellectual 
stuff of the old world, and he struggled to re-constitute that material in the new 
land, re-interpreting it and making it applicable and pertinent to early America. 
Brown's critics often characterize him as they do other figures of the period. To 
them, his work appears "derivative." But as Ashcroft, Griffiths and Tiffin 
recognize, these judgements typify the critical discourses of hegemony.48 Brown 
appropriates his materials from the old world, but his concerns are specific to the 
new. His work must appear inferior if evaluated based upon the standards 
delineated by the English literary tradition. But whether true or false, these 
judgments are unproductive. Through an appropriation and re-situation of 
European ideas and forms, Brown's work manifests a noble attempt to construct 
indigeneity in the new land, and Brown himself is an essential progenitor to the 
central figures of the American Renaissance, a cornerstone figure in the "Ameri­
can" literary tradition. 
Notes 
I would like to extend a special thank you to Cheryl Oreovicz and Robert Paul Lamb of 
Purdue University for their generous advice and commentary on early drafts of this essay. 
1. Mary Shelley was the author of Frankenstein or, The Modern Prometheus (1818) and Mary 
Wollstonecraft was the author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792). 
2. Lulu Rumsey Wiley, The Sources and Influence of the Novels of Charles Brockden Brown 
(New York, 1950). 
3. Warner Berthoff, "Brockden Brown: The Politics of the Man of Letters," The Serif 3 
(December 1966), 5. 
4. Ibid., 6. 
5. Shirley Samuels, "Infidelity and Contagion: The Rhetoric of Revolution," Early American 
Literature, 22 (Fall 1987), 189. 
6. William Hedges, "Charles Brockden Brown and the Culture of Contradictions," Early 
American Literature, 9 (Fall 1974), 112. 
7. Certain critics have expressed a skepticism regarding the applicability of postcolonial 
theories in an American context. In "American Literary Emergence as a Postcolonial Phenomenon," 
American Literary History, 4 (Fall 1992), Lawrence Buell argues that the concept of postcoloniality 
is somewhat problematic when considering American literature, because America emerged as a 
"proto-imperial" rather than a postcolonial power. He suggests that analyses which overemphasize 
the phenomenon of postcoloniality tend to reduce American texts to allegories of national identity 
making. In Truth in American Fiction, (Athens, Georgia and London, 1990), Janet Gabler-Hover 
implicitly critiques the applicability of pluralistic postcolonial paradigms, arguing that Brown's work 
seems to ground truth claims in a particular model of language, thereby abrogating the influence of 
 Constructing Indigeneity 87 
a multiplicity of cultural voices. But in a postcolonial context this language model exists in a state of 
flux, and the somewhat desperate attempt at "grounding" is particularly indicative of the writer in the 
postcolonial situation. Buell focuses on the expansionist years of the early and mid-nineteenth 
century, rather than on the early national period, which was a time when the long-term success of the 
American nation-state was still in question. 
8. Bill Ashcroft, Gareth Griffiths, and Helen Tiffin, The Empire Writes Back: Theory and 
Practice in Post-Colonial Literatures (London, 1989), 133. 
9. Ibid., 2. 
10. D.E.S. Maxwell, "Landscape and Theme," Landscape and Theme: Extracts from the 
Proceedings of a Conference Held at Bodington Hall, Leeds (London, 1965), 3. 
11. Ashcroft, Griffiths, and Tiffin, The Empire Writes Back, 136. 
12. Kenneth Dauber, "Criticism of American Literature," Diacritics, 24 (Spring 1977), 55. 
13. For an extensive discussion of "place," which is a concept linked to identity and indigeneity 
in postcolonial literatures, see Peggy Nightengale, éd., A Sense of Place in New Literatures in English 
(St. Lucia, Australia, 1986). 
14. To use the phrase "concerns of postcolonial theorists" is perhaps an oversimplification. 
Postcolonial "theory" cannot be categorized under the umbrella of a single paradigm. The separatism 
of Franz Fanon contrasts markedly with the pluralism of Ashcroft, Griffiths, and Tiffin. Terms such 
as "appropriation" and "syncreticity," are somewhat more appropriate to the concerns of the pluralist. 
Still, postcolonial theorists from various perspectives share a concern for a central issue—the process 
by which indigeneity is constructed in the postcolonial context. 
15. Albert Mernmi, The Colonizer and the Colonized (New York, 1965), 79-118. 
16. Ashcroft, Griffiths, and Tiffin, The Empire Writers Back, 90. 
17. Ibid., 138. 
18. Edward Said, Orientalism (New York, 1978), 10. 
19. For a thorough discussion of epistemological issues as they relate to American history and 
national and literary identity, see David Van Leer, Emerson's Epistemology: The Argument of the 
Essays (New York, 1986). 
20. For a complete discussion of Lockean empiricism as it appears in Brown's work, see Toni 
O'Shaughnessy, "An Imperfect Tale: Interpretive Accountability in Weiland," Studies in American 
Fiction 23 (Spring 1989), 42-54. 
21. Roland Hagenbuchle, "American Literature and the Nineteenth-Century Crisis in Episte­
mology: The Example of Charles Brockden Brown," Early American Literature, 23 (1988), 122. 
22. Hedges, 108-109. 
23. Richard Chase, The American Novel and its Tradition (Garden City, New York, 1957), 
1,6,11. Marius Bewley, "Fenimore Cooper and the Economic Age," American Literature, 26 ( 1954), 
reprinted in The Eccentric Design: Form in the Classic American Novel (New York, 1959), 18. 
24. Marisa Bulgheroni, La Tentazione della chimera: Charles Brockden Brown e le origine del 
romanzo americano (Rome, 1965). 
25. Richard Terdiman, Discourse/Counter-Discourse: The Theory and Practice of Symbolic 
Resistance in Nineteenth-Century France (Ithaca, 1985), 117. 
26. Ibid., U7. 
27. Charles Brockden Brown, éd., The Monthly Magazine and American Review, 1 (April 
1799), 1. 
28. Ibid. 
29. Wiley provides an in-depth discussion of Brown's influences in general, and Godwin's 
Inquiry is a text from which Brown drew much of his political and social thinking. 
30. Charles Brockden Brown, éd., Monthly Magazine and American Review, (April 1799), 1. 
31. Charles Brockden Brown, éd., Monthly Magazine and American Review, (May 1799), 90. 
32. Ibid. 
33. Ibid., 91. 
34. Ibid. 
35. Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America (1835; New York, 1956), 144-145. 
36. Sydney E. Ahlstrom, A Religious History of the American People (New Haven, 1972), 387. 
See also Edwin S. Gaustad, A Documentary History of Religion in America to the Civil War (Grand 
Rapids, 1982); Catherine L. Albanese, American: Religions and Religion (Belmont, Calif., 1981); 
Roger Finke and Rodney Stark, The Churching of America (New Brunswick, 1992). 
37. See Daniel Walker Howe, The Unitarian Conscience: Harvard Moral Philosophy, 18051861
(Middletown, Conn., 1970). 
38. Edward Said, Orientalism, 7. 
39. Charles Brockden Brown, éd., Monthly Magazine and American Review, (April 1799), 13. 
40. Ibid., 12. 
41. Ibid., 13. 
42. Ibid. 
43. Ibid., 15. 
44. Ibid. 
 88 Steven Frye 
45. Franz Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth (New York, 1963), 223. 
46. See the discussion of Cooper, Hawthorne, and Melville that appears in Henry Seidel Canby, 
Thomas H. Johnson, Robert E. Spiller, and William Thorpe, Literary History of the United States 
(New York, 1953). 
47. For a thorough review of Brown's political leanings, see David Lee Clark, Charles 
Brockden Brown: Pioneer Voice of America (Durham, 1952). 
48. Ashcroft, Griffiths, and Tiffin, The Empire Writes Back, 136. 
