down from slavery 
invisible man's 
descent into the city 
and the discovery of self 
robert butler 
"Not only could you travel upward toward success, 
but you could travel downward as well." 
Invisible Man 
Gabriel Morton and Lucia White observed in their seminal 1962 study The 
Intellectual Versus the City that "For a variety of reasons our most celebrated 
thinkers have expressed different degrees of ambivalence and animosity toward 
the city." Citing an "anti-urban roar" in "our national literary pantheon," 
containing writers such as Jefferson, Emerson, Thoreau, Hawthorne, Melville, 
Poe and Henry Adams, they claimed that there is nothing in our national litera­
ture like "the Greek attachment to polis or the French writer's affection for 
Paris." Their examination of the writers who have constituted "the core of our 
intellectual history" led them to conclude that it "would be extremely difficult 
to cull from their writings a large anthology of poetry or social philosophy in 
celebration of American urban life."1 
However, a dramatic reversal of this anti-urban bias in American literature 
may be found in Afro-American writing, a literary tradition which has frequently 
been critical of the values expressed in mainstream American literature. While 
0026-3079/88/2901 -0057$01.50/0 
5 7 
 one of the central drives in our classic literature has been a nearly reflexive 
desire to move away from the complexity and supposed corruption of cities 
toward idealized non-urban settings such as Cooper's West, Thoreau's woods, 
Whitman's open road and Twain's river, nearly the opposite has been true in 
Afro-American letters. To be sure, several classic black texts such as Washing­
ton's Up From Slavery, and Dunbar's Lyrics from Lowly Life, express a deep 
suspicion of urban experience and strongly advise blacks to remain in the rural 
South. And in recent years a number of impressive novels written by black 
women, most notably Alice Walker's The Color Purple and Paula Marshall's 
Praisesong for the Widow, are centered in an essentially pastoral outlook. But 
in the main, Afro-American literature from its beginnings to the present has been 
persistently urban in vision. The Narrative of Frederick Douglass, for example, 
portrays the rural South as a plantation culture intent on exploiting and then 
destroying black people, and envisions the city as a place of deliverance. 
Entering New York harbor after escaping slavery, Douglass felt like one who 
had escaped from a den of hungry lions" and later feels himself at "the starting 
point of a new existence"2 when he moves to New Bedford. In the same way, 
Incidents of a Slave Girl concludes with Linda Brent achieving freedom and 
selfhood in a number of cities after escaping a life of slavery on a Southern 
plantation. Emerging from the "black pit"3 of her past life, she discovers a new 
life in Philadelphia, New York and Boston. W. E. B. DuBois, who was born 
in a small village in Western Massachusetts, likewise found greatly expanded 
possibilities for development in cities such as Boston and Atlanta. James 
Weldon Johnson, visiting New York for the first time in 1899, enthusiastically 
embraced the modern American city as a place of renewal: 
The glimpse of life I caught during our last two or three weeks 
in New York . . . showed me a new world, an alluring world, 
a tempting world of greatly lessened restraints, a world of fas­
cinating perils; but above all, a world of tremendous artistic po­
tentialities.4 
Langston Hughes would later help to fulfill these artistic potentialities in his 
celebrations of Harlem, a city which fired his imagination and became the center 
of his life and art His first view of New York in 1925 is remarkably similar 
to Johnson's earlier evocation of that city: 'There is no thrill in all the world 
like entering, for the first time, New York Harbor. . . . New York is truly the 
dream city—city of towers near God, city of hopes and visions."5 Richard 
Wright's vision of Chicago is split between wonder and terror but the city is 
always preferable to the rural alternatives in Mississippi which Wright so cate­
gorically rejected. A "fabulous . . . indescribable city," Chicago was both a 
brutally naturalistic environment which could crush Bigger Thomas and also a 
world of "high idealism"6 which could help to liberate the narrator of Black Boy 
and American Hunger. Never romanticized, it nonetheless provided Wright with 
a compelling symbol of American identity, the larger world for which he hun­
gered. And when Wright despaired of achieving a human identity in America, 
he renewed his search for selfhood in Paris. 
5 8 
 Most important black literature which has emerged since the Depression has 
also been largely urban in character. While never hesitant to criticize the 
negative aspects of the American city, it has usually resisted the temptation of 
romantically positing an alternative to urban reality in an idealized pastoral 
setting. Moreover, this large and significant body of literature contains some 
surprising celebrations of city life. James Baldwin's best fiction is rooted in 
New York, a place of extraordinary beauty as well as pain. Claude Brown's 
Manchild in the Promised Land, which set out to tell the story of "the first 
urban generation of Negroes," is careful to point out that urban blacks are 
"better off 7 than their counterparts in the rural South because the city, for all 
its corruption and violence, has the vitality and educational possibilities neces­
sary for the "better life" which Brown himself achieved. Amiri Baraka's 1981 
essay "Black Literature and the Afro-American Nation: The Urban Voice" 
argues that, from the Harlem Renaissance onward, black literature has been 
"urban shaped," producing a uniquely "black urban consciousness." While 
careful not to idealize the condition of blacks in American urban centers, he 
predicts that the setting for black liberation will be the cities, because black 
consciousness there has reached a point where it can undertake advanced levels 
of revolutionary activity: "But if the cities represent higher levels of perception 
and sophistication for us in America, they must be the focal point of yet more 
advanced levels of struggle."8 And Toni Morrison, although stressing that the 
American city in general has often induced a sense of "alienation" in many 
black writers, nevertheless adds that modern black literature is suffused with an 
"affection" for "the village within" the city, black neighborhoods which are 
repositories for life-sustaining "community values."9 Gwendolyn Brooks' poetry 
often celebrates this sense of cultural unity within the black neighborhoods of 
South Chicago. A "village" of black life can be found even in Gloria Naylor's 
The Women of Brewster Place. Despite the urban horrors which that book so 
painfully details, some hope is affirmed at the end of the novel by the emer­
gence of community spirit symbolized by the tearing down of ghetto walls and 
the preparations for a block party. 
One way to explain this surprisingly positive image of the city in AfroAmerican
literature is to examine the historical experience of blacks in America. 
From the very outset, blacks were denied imaginative access to a pre-urban 
homeland in Africa because the institution of slavery did everything possible to 
stamp out the memory of that homeland. And the actual experience of slaves 
in America did not permit them the luxury of romantically imagining the nonurban
settings which are so mythically prominent in the fictions of Cooper, 
Melville and Twain. As Huckleberry Finn and Jim sadly discover, the territories 
ahead could be truly liberating only for whites. In the era following the literal 
ending of slavery, new strategies for reinslavement were devised in the South 
where codes of segregation and the practice of sharecropping were to make it 
impossible for blacks to establish a positive image of rural life which could 
serve as a counterbalance to the pull of the cities. The black writer, therefore, 
has usually found it inappropriate to envision idealized non-urban space as a 
relief from the pressures of urban living. For these reasons, the city has been 
an important symbol in black literature and that literature has been remarkable 
5 9 
 for the variety of ways it has made powerful and unique affirmations about 
urban life in America. 
I 
Ellison's Invisible Man is a vivid example of this pro-urban drive in AfroAmerican
literature because it reduces to absurdity the hero's experiences in the 
rural South and extends to him the possibility of a kind of redemption in the 
Northern city. The small town in which the hero grows up, ironically given the 
pastoral name of "Greenwood,"10 is revealed in the Battle Royal episode as a 
place intent on blinding him with illusions about American life and trapping him 
in the debilitating roles of a segregated society. The college he attends appears 
to be a kind of "Eden" but is in fact a "flower studded wasteland" (29). The 
hero's experiences in both of these apparently bucolic settings arouse his hopes 
of finding a place for himself in the American dream but actually reduce him 
to the level of a robot controlled by people who use him for their own purposes. 
His movement to New York City, however, suggests a way out of these 
traps. After he has been "expelled" (91) from his false Eden and "cast into the 
darkness" (105), he moves North to a larger and potentially more liberating 
world. As Ellison himself has observed of his hero in Shadow and Act, "He 
leaves the South and goes North; this, as you will notice in reading Negro 
folktales, is always the road to freedom—the movement upward. You have the 
same thing when he leaves his underground cave for the open."11 This is the 
Dreiserian "city of dreams," a "world of possibility" (122) which the hero 
beholds in wonder as he steps off a Greyhound bus and contemplates Harlem 
for the very first time. As he observes late in the novel, New York is for him 
a fluid, open world with "all boundaries down," a new space where "you could 
actually make yourself anew" (377). 
What the hero must discover, however, is that the city which he beholds in 
such wonder is not a simple world containing one meaning but is in fact a 
tangle of painful contradictions. Like himself and American reality in general, 
the city is complexly double. He eventually discovers his own duality when he 
realizes that "there were two of me" (281), a public self enslaved by society's 
expectation that he climb the ladder of outward "success" and a private self 
which is deformed by this "black rite of Horatio Alger" (87). In the same way, 
he comes to see New York as two mutually opposed cities: First, the city clas­
sically portrayed in Horatio Alger novels, an urban world enticing him with 
external rewards such as money, power and status, and second, an existential 
city which offers an enriched consciousness leading to freedom and genuine self­
hood.1 2 
His movements in these cities take two very different forms. The Algerian 
city invites him to move "upward" in American life toward various forms of 
outward success. But as the Batde Royal and his early experiences in New 
York clearly indicate, this upward movement exacts a terrible price, for it forces 
him to move away from the self toward various false roles eroding his identity. 
His movements in the existential city, however, are consistently downward, 
moving away from outward success and toward a greater degree of personal 
6 0 
 freedom, independence and self awareness. Rushing toward the center of 
Harlem late in the novel, he describes this movement as a race to the self: "I 
ran through the night, ran within myself (403). 
But for much of the novel he is engaged in a fruitless "footrace against" 
(287) himself as he moves blindly through an Algerian city mapped out by 
others intent on using him. He is sent to New York by Bledsoe ostensibly to 
redeem himself after the fiasco at the Golden Day. His letters of recommenda­
tion to various important people in the city apparently will put him in touch 
with the "sponsors" who in the Alger myth always open the doors of success 
for the hardworking young boy desirous of "rising" in life.13 The hero tempo­
rarily takes up residence in Men's House, a place which has traditionally housed 
black men who have left the South to pursue the American Dream in the North. 
But when he finds out from Emerson's son that his letters will not lead him to 
sponsors interested in helping him to "rise" in life, but, on the contrary, will put 
him on a wild-goose chase toward a "horizon" which "recedes ever brightly and 
distantly from the hopeful traveler" (145), he rejects everything which Men's 
House stands for and resolves to make his own way in the city. 
Ironically, however, he uses another recommendation, the one provided by 
Emerson's son, and this brings him to Liberty Paint, which is described as a 
"small city" (149). What he encounters there is another version of the Alger 
myth which now promises upward mobility by becoming part of a complex 
industrial society. Here again, the city seems to offer freedom from a restrictive 
Southern past but in fact provides him with another version of that past. 
Working for Kimbro, whom his fellow workers characterize as a "slave driver" 
(151) and whom he sees as "a Northern redneck, a Yankee cracker" (152), he 
becomes part of an urban plantation which reduces him to the level of a share­
cropper at best and a slave at worst. The hero is exactly right when he thinks 
that "there were unseen lines which ran from North to South" (128). Attaining 
one's freedom is not a simple matter of physically moving to a Northern city 
because the urban North has been contaminated by the same racism and brutality 
which characterizes the pastoral regions of the deep South. 
Even in his acts of conscious rebellion against the Alger myth the hero 
ironically repeats the experience of slavery in the Northern city. Signing up 
with the Brotherhood because it promises him "the highest possible rewards" 
(268) and a liberating role to play, he ultimately discovers that he is trapped in 
the same way that he was trapped in the Battle Royal. Here again he is 
carefully monitored by whites who want to make him "the new Booker T. 
Washington" (231), a person who will channel black political energy into forms 
which are acceptable to whites. And just as his involvements in the Battle 
Royal result in self destructive violence for himself and others, his involvement 
in the Brotherhood culminates in the Harlem Riot which the Brotherhood engi­
neers, a mad explosion which the hero ultimately describes as "not suicide but 
murder" (417). Put another way, his Brotherhood experiences lead him to yet 
another dead-end, confinement in a Dantean "city of the dead" (324), a Hell 
brought on by his own blindness and desires for power and status. 
What he needs to enter the existential city of possibility is the kind of 
consciousness necessary to correctly read his urban experiences so that he can 
6 1 
 map his own way through the city and thus discover the city as a reflector and 
liberator of the self. In the Vet's words, he has "to learn to look beneath the 
surface" (118). This ultimately brings him literally into an existential underworld 
which frees him by completely inverting the values of the Horatio Alger myth, 
sending him down to the liberating regions of the self instead of up towards the 
material goals which have in fact enslaved him all his life. 
Getting to the urban underworld, however, is no easy process, because he 
has always been trained to see success in Algerian terms as upward movement 
and freedom, or in Booker T. Washington's terms as rising from a condition of 
servitude. He begins the process of liberation leading to the "underground" of 
the self by spontaneously wandering through the hidden parts of the city, slowly 
becoming more aware of it as an emblem of the hidden parts of himself. 
Penetrating a city which he informally maps for himself, he gradually discovers 
the hidden recesses of his own nature. 
This process begins shortly after the Hospital sequence where he takes the 
subway to Harlem and then passes out on the streets. Stunned by the explosions 
at Liberty Paint and the electro-shock therapy at the Hospital, the hero is freed 
from the Algerian "plan" for success imposed on him at the Battle Royal and 
reinforced in all subsequent episodes. Significandy, he moves to Harlem, which 
is a kind of underground, a "city within a city" (122). His free movements in 
Harlem repeatedly result in increased self awareness as he discovers the falsity 
of an American Dream which promises freedom for all but creates an immense 
ghetto depriving enormous masses of their political, social and economic rights. 
Developing the habit, while living with Mary Rambo, of reading books from the 
library during the day and "wanderfing] the streets until late at night" (197), the 
hero begins the slow process of reading the city and the self. Deciphering the 
codes contained in books and the urban landscape, he finally begins to interpret 
the secrets that have been deeply buried within himself for most of his life. 
The first example of this occurs approximately half way through the novel 
when, hurrying through the streets one day, he comes upon a vendor selling 
yams. This key episode endows him with "an intense feeling of freedom" (201) 
because it awakens in him a renewed respect for his folk traditions and their 
ability to "nourish" him more than the Alger myth, which has him rejecting soul 
food for a standard breakfast of toast, juice and coffee. This scene contrasts 
sharply with an earlier episode on the city streets when the hero meets the man 
calling himself Peter Wheatstraw. Whereas in the earlier episode, the hero was 
not able—and probably unwilling—to decipher the folk codes which are such a 
key part of his identity, here he understands what the street vendor is talking 
about and identifies strongly with the rich ethnic past which the sweet yams 
evoke. While the earlier Street scene with Wheatstraw resulted in the hero 
rejecting his racial traditions, thinking "they're a hell of a people" (135), this 
scene in Harlem culminates in his thinking with pride "What a group of people 
we were" (200). 
Shortly after this he moves into "a side street" (202) where his perceptions 
are developed further as he witnesses an old black couple being evicted from 
their apartment. The vaguely-felt nostalgia induced by eating the yams becomes 
a much more disturbing feeling of anger and betrayal when he sees all of the 
6 2 
 couple's possessions thrown out on the street, reduced to what he will later 
describe as "junk whirled eighty-seven years in a cyclone" (211). Again, the 
urban scene speaks to him in a vital way: 
I turned aside and looked at the clutter of household objects 
which the two men continued to pile on the walk. And as the 
crowd pushed me I looked down to see looking out of an oval 
frame a portrait of the old couple when young, seeing the sad, 
stiff dignity of the faces there; feeling strange memories awak­
ening that began an echoing in my head like that of a hysterical 
voice stuttering in a dark street (205). 
Here the outer cityscape becomes a compelling metaphor of the hero's self, 
which is tied to a cultural and racial past for which he finally takes responsi­
bility. As he observes the dispossession of the old couple, he realizes that he 
too has been dispossessed of the same American Dream promised to them. The 
outward street thus becomes the "dark street" of his mind, filled with a critically 
important new sign of selfhood, the "hysterical voice" so long repressed since 
the Batde Royal but which now cries out for full articulation. 
Throughout the remainder of the novel the hero continues to move into the 
self as he freely explores the existential city. He thus slowly becomes aware 
of the wisdom of Wheatstraw's statement that Harlem may be a "bear's den" but 
"it's the best place for you and me" (123). Wandering the streets after he has 
witnessed Clifton's death, he thinks "It was as though in this short block I was 
forced to walk past everyone I had ever known" (335). More importantly, he 
becomes increasingly sensitive to two voices which he had previously been 
trained to ignore—the voice of the city and the voice arising from the deepest 
levels of his consciousness. From his very first moments in Harlem he had 
been aware that these two voices are somehow related: 
I had always thought of my life as being confined in the South. 
And now as I struggled through the lives of people a new world 
of possibility suggested itself to me faintly, like a small voice 
that was barely audible in the roar of city sounds. I moved 
wide-eyed, trying to take the bombardment of impressions 
(122). 
Just as the roar of the city awakens his sensations so that he sees and hears in 
an intensified way, it also releases in him a "small voice" of possibility which 
was muffled in the Battle Royal episode and completely silenced in his inter­
view with Bledsoe. The vital roar of the city, so unlike the deadly silence of 
the campus, begins a true process of education for the hero because it draws 
from him the existential "voice" which is at the core of his self. 
As the novel progresses, the hero's small voice amplifies as his conscious­
ness of the city becomes more comprehensive and enriched. After delivering a 
Brotherhood speech, he thinks "I threw my voice hard down against the traffic 
sounds" (278). While speaking at Clifton's funeral he imagines the crowd 
6 3 
 looking at "the pattern of my voice on the air" (343). By the end of the novel, 
he has developed a voice which is as richly complex and sophisticated as the 
city itself. Moreover, he has switched from an oral to a written voice, moving 
from the status of orator to novelist. This is a crucial change for it makes him 
less dependent upon the needs of his immediate audience and better able to 
sound his own depths. The role of writer also grants his voice a greater degree 
of permanency and universality, enabling him to reach the "lower frequencies" 
(439) which speak to all people. 
Invisible Man, therefore, stops modeling himself on Norton, Bledsoe, the 
Founder and others who deceived him with the Horatio Alger myth, and he 
ultimately sees himself as a latter day Frederick Douglass, the man who liber­
ated himself by moving from the rural South to the urban North and who 
transformed himself by becoming the master of his own voice. For he comes 
to regard Douglass as the man who "talked his way from slavery" (285) and 
created his own name, thus signifying the fact that he was a truly self-made 
man, one who became humanly successful, not by accumulating wealth and 
status but by fully actualizing the self. In this way he rejects a superficial 
Algerian plan for success and celebrates a more essential American dream, an 
existential version of Emersonian self-reliance. 
ii 
In her recent study of the American heroine, Blanche Gelfant argues that the 
city often becomes for women characters a modern equivalent of the West 
because it offers them the sort of free space necessary for achieving a "new 
life": 
In a city throbbing with dreams and desires, the heroine learns 
to identify her own needs, and living among strangers she has 
the privacy to cultivate personal desires usually condemned by 
family and friends as "selfishness" . . . . Enjoying physical and 
social space in the city, the heroine moves about freely and 
experiences movement as freedom. For her, the territory 
ahead—the essence of freedom in male myths of the West—lies 
around the corner, a few streets away, in another neighborhood 
where nobody knows her and where she alone will say who she 
is. 1 4 
Something very similar happens in Invisible Man. Rejecting pastoral settings 
such as the small town and the bucolic campus, the hero moves to the city 
where he is at first befuddled by the urban environment and is then controlled 
by others who possess greater awareness of how that environment functions. 
But he gradually experiences the city as a liberating frontier, a fresh version of 
the West offering the external and psychological space necessary for a new life 
characterized by radical forms of self-awareness, freedom and independence. 
The American frontier, which was described by Frederick Jackson Turner as "the 
meeting point between savagery and civilization,"15 is reborn again in Ellison's 
6 4 
 underground, a "border area" which mediates between "the jungle of Harlem" 
(5) and the decadent Manhattan of Emerson's Calamus Club and Jack's intricate 
political games. Although his underground, like the West, has been "shut off 
and forgotten during the nineteenth century" (5), he can reopen it through a 
prodigious act of will and imagination. A vital source of power and light, it 
converts him from an impotent robot into a fully conscious being able to direct 
his life in his own way. Ellison's positively imagined underground, therefore, 
is a revealing contrast to the ironic underworlds portrayed in Wright's "The Man 
Who Lived Underground" and Baraka's Dutchman. Whereas Wright's and 
Baraka's psychologically underdeveloped protagonists are murdered in tomb-like 
settings beneath the streets because they lack the experience and mental acuity 
to take full advantage of urban possibilities, Ellison's sophisticated, intellectually 
keen hero envisions his ingenious subterranean "home" (5) as a place of "hiber­
nation" (11) providing him with the kind of new life which traditional American 
heroes have found in the West. Although a racist society forces him under­
ground to kill him, he can, unlike Wright's Fred Daniels and Baraka's Clay, use 
his own inward resources to transform a cold, dead place into a warm, lifegiving
space. 
Paradoxically, the underground is for Ellison an urban equivalent of what 
the frontier was for Thoreau, a brilliant metaphor of the limitless possibilities of 
the self. Just as Thoreau exhorted his readers to become "the Lewis and Clark 
. . . of your own streams and oceans; explore your own higher latitudes,"16 
Ellison artfully interiorizes the Western myth by suggesting that selfhood may be 
attained by descending into our lower latitudes, the underground of the self 
which is "space, unbroken" (428), a "dimensionless room" (429) reflective of the 
self s "infinite possibilities" (435). Converting the territories ahead into the 
territories inside his head, Ellison's hero becomes a true citizen of his own "city 
. . . of dreams" (122). 
He is careful to remind us, however, that this does not result in a neurotic 
escape, a puerile evasion of either his racial roots or his social responsibilities. 
As the Prologue makes clear, his descent into self is made possible only by 
encountering the full complexity of his racial past which contains both the pain 
of slavery and the transcendence afforded by black artists such as Louis Arm­
strong who have made "poetry" (6) out of their racial experience, thus convert­
ing a condition of oppression into "a beam of lyrical sound" (6). Moreover, his 
descent into the innermost reaches of the self paradoxically empowers him 
finally to return to the above-ground city where he is determined to play out a 
"socially responsible role" (439). He lays great stress in the Epilogue on the 
fact that "the old fascination with playing a role returns and I'm drawn upward 
again" (437). Several important new roles do indeed await him in the above 
ground world; for example, he does in fact become a writer who reveals the 
truth about his society, and he could become involved in political activity very 
different from that prescribed by either Jack or Ras. Now that he has effec­
tively studied "the lesson of [his] own life" (432) he could also become, like his 
grandfather, a teacher in the broadest sense of the word. These roles are lib­
erating because they enrich the self while allowing the hero to connect himself 
to a larger social world in the city. In this way, each of these new roles is quite 
6 5 
 different from the old roles which nearly turned him into a robot because they 
arise from his own enriched, deepened, consciousness rather than the "plans" 
other people have devised for him. He therefore tells us that his "hibernation" 
(433) in the underground is nearly over and that he goes above ground every 
night to seek out "the next phase" (435) of his life. 
Although he is not yet able (or willing) to define precisely the exact nature 
of the roles he will play for fear of being limited by them, the two anecdotes 
he relates about his above ground experiences offer ample proof that he is not 
"jiving" (439) when he speaks of acting effectively in the city. Both of these 
stories, the fight which he describes in the Prologue and the conversation with 
Norton which he dramatizes in the Epilogue, establish the hero as fundamentally 
different from the victimized country bumpkin he was in his pre-underground 
days. Whereas he formerly lacked the consciousness necessary to direct his life 
and was therefore easily manipulated by others, he is now in full control of 
himself and his social environment. 
Aware in the Prologue that his white attacker is a pathetic victim of a racist 
world which blinds his eyes and blunts his heart, Invisible Man can transform 
violence into awareness, laughing with "sincere compassion" (4) at a man who 
was mugged by an invisible man. He thus saves himself from the self-defeating 
violence which has threatened him in nearly every major episode in the novel, 
from the Battle Royal to the Harlem Riot. He also extends the same kind of 
richly human "mixed feelings" (436) toward Norton when he sees him patheti­
cally lost on the subway and asking for directions to Centre Street, the locus of 
political power and government in New York City. Whereas he had earlier 
made Norton an Algerian sponsor and begged him for direction in life, he now 
gives subtly ironic directions to Norton who is too hurried and self-deluded to 
become aware of their meaning: "Take any train; they all go to the Golden D" 
(437). No longer riding on the hard rails of other people's expectations which 
lead to madness, the hero can reject the Algerian city which still dominates 
Norton's life. Abandoning Norton's city of delusions once and for all, invisible 
man returns temporarily to his urban underground, laughing all the way at 
Norton's absurdity. He thus becomes more fully aware that his own life has 
ultimately found a truer "center"—the urbane consciousness which will allow 
him to transcend existentially the "fate" imagined for him by the Nortons of the 
world. 
Canisius College 
notes 
1. Gabriel Morton and Lucia White, The Intellectual Versus the City: From Thomas 
Jefferson to Frank Lloyd Wright (Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1962), I, 2, 3. 
2. Houston Baker, ed., Narrative of the life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave 
(New York, 1982), 143, 150. 
3. Henry Louis Gates Jr., ed., The Classic Slave Narratives (New York, 1987), 505. It 
is important to understand, however, that neither Frederick Douglass nor Linda Brent por­
trays a naively idealized view of the Northern city. Both were acutely aware that the Fugitive 
Slave Law made it very easy for them to be removed from the city and returned to slavery 
in the rural South. Both also were quick to discover that the Northern city was not free of 
racism—Douglass was denied a job as caulker in the shipyards of New Bedford because he 
6 6 
 was black and Linda Brent was subjected to the indignities of Jim Crow laws in Boston, 
Philadelphia and New York. Nevertheless, Douglass and Brent certainly prefer the Northern 
city to the rural South, a place both writers describe as a kind of Hell. For all its limitations, 
the Northern city provided them with greatly expanded possibilities for human development 
which they eagerly responded to and capitalized on. 
4. James Weldon Johnson, Along This Way (New York, 1933) , 152. 
5. Quoted in Arnold Rampersad's The Life of Langston Hughes, Volume I: 1902-1941, 
/ Too Sing America (New York, 1986), 50. 
6. Richard Wright, "How Bigger Was Born," included as the Introduction to the 
Harper and Row edition of Native Son (New York, 1940), xxvi. Michel Fabre in The Unfin­
ished Quest of Richard Wright (New York, 1973) points out that Chicago, for all the difficul­
ties it created for Wright, still gave him a radically new life which freed his spirit. Char­
acterizing Wright's Chicago as "still the teeming, ever-expanding city that Carl Sandburg had 
immortalized," he claims that Chicago gave Wright crucially important opportunities not pos­
sible in his prior life. 
7. Claude Brown, Manchild in the Promised Land (New York, 1965), vii-viii. In his one 
trip away from New York when he visits relatives in the rural South, Brown is bored with 
and alienated by country living. He returns to New York with great relief: "Down South 
was sure a crazy place and it was good to be going back to New York." 
8. Michael C. Jaye and Ann Chalmers Watt, eds., Literature and the Urban Experience: 
Essays on the City and Literature (New Brunswick, New Jersey, 1981), 150, 148, 158. 
9. Jaye and Watt, 37, 38. 
10. Ralph Ellison, Invisible Man (New York, 1952), 87. All subsequent references to the 
text are to this Modern Library edition. Page numbers appear in parentheses after the 
quotations. 
11. Ralph Ellison, Shadow and Act (New York, 1966), 174. 
12. In his recent book Going to the Territory (New York, 1986) Ellison has elaborated 
in some detail on the crucial impact which New York City had on his own personal devel­
opment. Coming to New York in the summer of 1936 to earn enough money to complete his 
senior year at Tuskegee Institute, he soon became aware of the "cultural possibilities" and 
"social freedom" which the city offered him. Like the hero of the novel, he eventually came 
to see the city in existential terms as a "rite of initiation" for which he had to be his "own 
guide and instructor." 
New York becomes for him a "journey without a map" leading to self discovery and self 
creation. Now freed from the "claustrophobic provincialism" of the South which inhibited his 
growth by imposing narrow roles on him, he begins existentially to develop "a second se l f 
through a process of "masking" which he defines as "playing upon possibility, a strategy 
through which the individual projects a self-elected identity and make[s] of himself a work of 
art." Like the hero of the novel, he sees the city as a liberating new space which allows him 
to define himself in existential, protean terms. 
13. Most Alger novels espouse a clearly defined formula for success, providing a 
"paradigm" which books like Washington's Up from Slavery use for serious purposes, but 
Invisible Man inverts for ironic effects. Alger's Ragged Dick (New York, 1962), for example, 
centers on the hero's "plan" to achieve "a new life" by working hard and then impressing 
wealthy men who will provide a place for the hero in middle class life. Sponsors such as Mr. 
Greyson and Mr. Rockwell complete the hero's identity by providing him with a new name 
(Richard Hunter, Esq.), a steady job, and the prospects of a continued "rise" in American life. 
Ellison's invisible man earnestly pursues his formula for success for most of the novel but 
abandons it because he realizes that such "success" will destroy his identity by turning him 
into a robot. He therefore separates from sponsors such as Norton, Bledsoe and Jack, 
simultaneously rejecting the material rewards they have promised him. He also stubbornly 
refuses the names which others have imposed upon him, preferring to have no name. Namelessness
represents the fluid, indeterminate identity he achieves by existentially descending into 
the self. 
14. Blanche Gelfant, Women Writing in America (Hanover, New Hampshire, 1984), 219. 
15. George Rogers Taylor, The Turner Thesis Concerning the Role of the Frontier in 
American History (Lexington, Massachusetts, 1972), 4. In his own biographical observations 
Ellison stresses the importance of the frontier in the development of his own American 
consciousness. In Shadow and Act he describes his Oklahoma at that time as a "border" state 
having no tradition of chattel slavery. Thus it put him in contact with the liberating values 
of the frontier life—independence, freedom, and a "boy's dream of possibility." In Going to 
the Territory he once again stresses the positive aspects of the Oklahoma he grew up in as "a 
territory of hope," and "a relatively unformed frontier state." Furthermore, he describes New 
York City as a new kind of psychic frontier which he explores by assuming the "American 
role of pioneer." Emphasizing the fact that he came to New York because he wanted "room 
to discover who I was," he makes the city a modern equivalent of the West because it opens 
up the psychological "space" necessary for self-discovery and development. 
16. Henry David Thoreau, Wolden and On the Duty of Civil Disobediance (New York, 
1948), 268. 
6 7 
