Landscapes and national imagination: 
The role of national parks in the formation of 
national belonging in Turkey 
Asya Ece Uzmay1,1 
 
1Kadir Has University, Faculty of Art and Design, Department of Architecture, Istanbul, Turkey 
 
Abstract. When the concept of a national park idea was first 
established in the USA, it was promoted as the ownership of the 
landscape for the use of the people while emphasizing national 
identity through nature. As a latecomer to this movement, this 
paper describes part of the journey of the establishment of 
national parks in Turkey, with a focus on the period between 1950 
and 1975. In this paper I argue that the national parks were a 
means of constructing a national identity through the 
transformative power of modernism on the countryside. Focusing 
on different national parks from Turkey, I interrogated the role of 
these so-called pristine and primitive lands in the construction of 
national identity through different forms. Under the threat of neoliberal
economic policies and new approaches to understanding 
of nature these protected and reserved pieces of “nature” deserve 
more attention. 
Introduction 
 
National Parks were originally defined by the US Congress as “a great breathing-place 
for the national lungs” [1] (quoted by [2]). It was 1883 and there was an ongoing debate 
on whether Yellowstone should be declared a national park or not. National parks 
include the “preservation of the nature” idea which can be found within Modernism as 
well as having a role in the formation of national identity – stunning dramatic scenery 
defining the unique character of the USA. In this paper I interrogate this relationship 
between the landscape and the national identity within the scope of Turkey by 
discussing how national identity is built through nature, especially in the case of national 
parks which tame and rationalise nature through a modernisation process.  
The national park idea defines a landscape preserved for a nation protected from 
the developmental ideas of modernism and modernisation. To Henry David Thoreau, 
one of the late 19th century Transcendentalist intellectuals in America who was 
influenced mostly by English and German Romanticism, wilderness is seen “as a 
																																																						
1 Corresponding author: a.eceuzmay@gmail.com  
© The Authors, published by EDP Sciences. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
SHS Web of Conferences 63, 12001 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/20196312001
MODSCAPES 2018
 reservoir of intellectual nourishment for civilized men” [2: 102]. The historian Simon 
Schama mentions “the Father of the National Parks” John Muir’s declaration on the 
impossibility of pureness: “in order to keep it pure we have to occupy it” (quoted in [3: 9]). 
The human interpretation of wilderness resulted in the manipulation of nature and the 
displacements of the native people who inhabited it along with a utilitarian approach to 
its management. 
I question the national park idea by drawing on scholarship, mainly from Denis 
Cosgrove’s idea of landscape as a source for rootedness, belonging, and identity [4] 
and James C. Scott’s idea of controlling the landscape in nation-building [5] as well as 
William Cronon’s questioning of constructed nature [6]. First, I look for the national park 
as an idea of preserving pristine lands for the benefit of a nation as it emerged in the 
United States and spread through the world. Then, I briefly examine the history of the 
national park idea in Turkey with a focus on the turning points in the perception of the 
national parks and sacredness of the landscape. Following this, I look at the 
preservation idea, imported by the United States Agency for International Development 
(USAID)2 to Matossian’s delayed-developed 3 countries, as a norm of civilized people 
in the case of Turkey. 
 
The national park idea: 
The dichotomy of domesticity and wilderness 
 
In the modernist discourse, landscape has a major role in nation-building. Claiming a 
piece of land as the origin of the nation strengthens the idea of a nation rooted in a 
specific space or land. That piece of land might be either a place already in existence 
or a totally imagined one, such as Turan for the Turkish people, or the German Drang 
nach Osten myth, or the Gaelic tribal culture for Irish people as their birth place [8]. 
Mythical landscapes, such as Turan, claim the idea of the nation’s origin as belonging 
to a particular geography. The cyclic feature of time in nature, and the power of recreation
after death, feed the idea that the nation will last for all eternity, as a 
“consolation for our mortality” [3: 15]. 
Before nation states, there were city-states in which citizens could communicate with 
their immediate community within their immediate surroundings. Landscapes were a 
part of their practical knowledge, just like in village life. However, after the advent of the 
territorial nation-states it became a duty for citizens to become familiar with every part 
of their land. Therefore, landscape went beyond practical knowledge and served other 
purposes. These lands were studied systematically and in detail in order to emphasize 
and claim the idea of belongingness. Geography started to be a subject taught in 
schools. It became the duty for every citizen to memorize the geography of their land to 
strengthen the idea of collectively belonging in an imagined community in a certain 
land4.  
The ‘primitive’ lands within the borders of states were enigmatic objects, which could 
be dominated by producing descriptive knowledge. Domination over nature can be seen 
in relation with the colonial discourse of Napoleonic excursions. Producing the 
knowledge of “untouched” places corresponded with claiming power over the lands. 
																																																						
2 USAID is still working for National Parks around the world. In 2009, they established the first 
National Park of Afghanistan [7]. 
3 I am borrowing the concept from Mary Matossian. 
4 For a discussion on geographic education in modern states as an example from Turkey, see 
[9] and [10]. 
2
SHS Web of Conferences 63, 12001 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/20196312001
MODSCAPES 2018
 This also resembles the idea of the separation of colonial thought: the dominator (man) 
and dominated (nature, wilderness) pacts. With its inhabitants, nature is seen as 
wilderness and a place waiting for discovery and examination. The idea of having 
control over nature, a utilitarian approach and a taming idea can be seen through 
building dams, cultivating fields and deforestation or afforestation, slaughtering bison 
and regulating nature [5]. 
In 1872, the Yellowstone became the first national park in the world. With a distance 
of “enlightened men” from “nature” and the relentless spread of the built environment, 
debates on “the protection of wilderness” started to rise. This resulted in the idea of 
protecting the American Wilderness as examples of divine architecture, as sources of 
moral prestige alongside technological development, as mentioning the civilized human 
presence on primitive wilderness. Besides, the idea of preserving these lands was seen 
as a “nourishment” of enlightened man [2]. In the process of nation-building in America, 
there were supposed to be differences from a European identity. As Coates and Beinart 
mention: “Americans located their ancient and hallowed relics not in crown jewels and 
gothic cathedrals but in redwoods and ‘purple mountain majesties’ ” [11: 75]. Also for 
Hammond, the march of civilization has crossed a continent. For “making the old 
wilderness blossom as a rose” and “progressive influence” there should “not only [be] 
miracles like locomotives, the telegraph, and photography but ‘moral prestige’ as well” 
[2: 104]. However, later on, these claims were supported by the economic values of the 
lands through the utilitarian approach, which were contradictory to the definition of 
nature preservation.  
Conversely, “wilderness” stands as an ambiguous concept since what is defined as 
wilderness represents the boundaries of civilized man. After Yellowstone was declared 
a national reserve, the government forced the Native Americans to move off the land. 
This situation ignores the previous inhabitants and projects power relations on 
wilderness5. Instead of displacement, displaying the human habitat of the wilderness 
can also be a way of preservation. For example, in Grand Canyon National Park, the 
Hopi people and their performances, staged as daily entertainment became part of the 
wilderness experience for tourist consumption [12]. It was a complete performance of 
nature for its timelessness. As the National Park idea expanded across the country to 
increase the representation of “American Wilderness” and for the needs of urbanite 
visitors who wanted to have the experience of nature without any surprises, the National 
Park Service adopted standardized rules for the duration of visits, such as the general 
behaviour towards living and non-living objects [2]. Also, by building roads, viewpoints, 
in-park education facilities, safety precautions and planned travel routes there emerged 
a predictable form of visit to these wild-but-tamed landscapes. 
 
National parks in Turkey: exhibiting the greatness of the homeland 
 
In Turkey, the first regulation regarding national parks was enacted in 1956, as part of 
the “Forest Law”. According to the law, forestry areas that have distinct features should 
be protected for scientific research, recreational and touristic purposes for the sake of 
the nation [13]. However, the idea of establishing a national park in Turkey goes further 
than this with writings on the notion of protecting nature via national parks. In particular, 
the Uludağ Mountain had a major influence on the national park concept. Just before 
																																																						
5 We see similar enforcements in Turkey, too. For example, in Olympus Seashore National Park 
plan, the former village in the beach were planned to relocate in somewhere else to “protect” 
the wilderness within the proper conditions.  
3
SHS Web of Conferences 63, 12001 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/20196312001
MODSCAPES 2018
 the Forest Law was enacted in 1956, an article was published in the architecture 
magazine Arkitekt about the ongoing debate on the national park idea. This article was 
supported with images and maps of national parks from the United States along with 
an explanation of the national park concept. Then it argued the ambiguous situation of 
Uludağ and whether it should have a national park status [14]. The debates on 
‘emphasizing’ Uludağ go back to the 1930s and had been discussed in the media. Thus, 
applying regulations to nature for recreational purposes became a topic of public debate 
and paved the way for the Forest Law. 
 
Conquering the mountain: Uludağ National Park 
 
Uludağ became a national park in 1961, yet the debates surrounding it have a longer 
history. Long before it was conquered by the Ottomans, it was known as “Keşiştepe 
(Peak of the Monk)” and Mount Olympus. It was a sacred place for Christians, one that 
was home to monasteries. It earned the name “Uludağ” (means “Sublime Mountain”) 
after Osman Şevki Uludağ, a deputy of Konya, who was influenced by the “greatness” 
of the mountain. He said, “This mountain [Uludağ] is the highest peak and has a 
dominant view of Anatolia. This part of Anatolia suffered a lot from the counterdiscourses
of the monks over the centuries. Turks were oppressed here” [15]. By 
changing the name, he declared the sovereignty of Turks both over the land and the 
mountain; both over Christianity and nature. 
This nationalist narrative was quite common. In 1932 an article was published in the 
Cumhuriyet Newspaper, declaring the conquest of the mountain as conquering a 
“Christian” mountain for Turks and a daunting object of nature by taming it. 
 
We could not yet find a proper way to benefit from the magnificent piece of nature. Although 
this enormous piece of work was so close, almost no one knew and examined it thoroughly. 
Thanks to Fatin Bey, the Governor of Bursa, a road had been built in a spot very close to its 
peak, with a hotel built in a dominant position on the mountain. 
 
He stated: 
 
It was known as ‘Keşiş (Monk)’ in old geography books, however now its name has been 
changed to ‘Uludağ’, this late seral forest has been opened to men, these deserted and wild 
peaks have been tamed. Now, this winding road which passes within the dense pine trees as 
a white strip, demonstrates that even this terrifying mountain can be tamed by man [16]. 
 
After Uludağ became accessible, it started to be viewed in the media as a place for 
performing sports, especially for skiing. In 1933, Bursa Mountain Sports Club was 
established “to improve mountain sports and to spread this sport which also serves for 
the defence of the motherland, throughout the country” [15]. The mountain was 
“conquered” with accommodation places, phone line and roads. It was in the service of 
the children of the nation as a triumph for the Republican idea [17]. 
Additionally, in the writings of Selahattin İnal, one of the professors of the 
Department of Forestry in İstanbul University, we can see a resemblance to 
Cosgroves’s idea of landscape. İnal relates that along the “tree ornamented” road to 
Uludağ, the trees are like the strong men who protect the land. He also sees them as 
an allegory of the re-birth of the nation. He continues by praising how Turks claimed the 
territories from Byzantium. Along the same road, the children of the nation would feel 
the greatness and the beauty of the homeland and be proud. Besides this, he pictures 
Uludağ with the small village houses dotting its skirts, and wants to see them all in white 
4
SHS Web of Conferences 63, 12001 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/20196312001
MODSCAPES 2018
 as “pearls that will shine in the early sun and support the beauty of Uludağ” [18]. As 
Urry mentions, landscapes and cities are inadequate without a framed and detached 
perspective [19]. To give joy to its spectators -which are the children of this nation- the 
view should be tamed.  
 
USAID Period 
 
At first, natural and recreational potential were important factors for a place to be 
considered as a candidate for a national park. Indeed, the National Park Department 
was under the Ministry of Forests. They usually worked together with the Ministry of 
Tourism and Information and Ministry of Reconstruction and Resettlement. Although 
there were attempts in the parliament to build more institutionalized regulations for 
national parks, the National Park Law took 25 years before it came into effect. With the 
Second Five Year Development Plan (1968-1972), in 1967, the State Planning 
Organization and USAID worked together in establishing national parks in Turkey. Zekai 
Bayer was the project coordinator as Head of the National Park Department in Turkey 
and had a key role in this collaboration. After completing forestry studies at Istanbul 
University, following Marshall Aid, he found several opportunities to visit the United 
States, the founder of the national park idea. In the United States, he studied 
recreational planning of forested areas and tourism.  
The collaboration between USAID and the State Planning Organization lasted for 
four years. During this period, a team of architects, an archaeologist, an engineer and 
a planner from the USAID together with the architects, technicians, forestry engineers 
and archaeologists from Turkey worked on twelve different projects and prepared the 
“Long Term Development Plans”. It was a transition to a more systematic way of 
building up the knowledge of these pristine nature areas. They studied factors such as 
the average daily sunny period, relative humidity, monthly precipitation averages with 
data reaching back to 1926, the historical background and importance of the places 
with their general approach to the site. The plan was worked in detail and varied 
according to the features of the area. For example, in the Master Plan for Protection 
and Use of Halicarnassus Seashore National Park it is written that “this plan recognizes 
the need to protect outstanding examples of the cultural and scenic heritage of Turkey 
for the education and enjoyment of her own people as well as international visitors” [20]. 
Then it continues with an emphasis on the unique natural features and socioeconomic
facilities. Also, keeping with a non-traditional model, they say that they are 
also protecting the ongoing human adaptation into a natural coastal landscape as an 
important socio-economic factor. These kinds of variety are attractive for tourists [20]. 
The aim was to preserve these coasts as an open air museum with all the local people, 
habitats and nature in it regardless of time, both as a reminder of pre-historic times and 
the primitive nature of early humankind. While they aimed to display the adaptive 
possibilities of humankind into nature through transformative power, in the Kovada Lake 
National Park, situated in Isparta, the claim was to give a sense of “familiarity”. In the 
project, dating back to 1970, it was declared that the information centre was positioned 
at the entrance of the park to remind the visitors that they are entering a controlled 
“wilderness”. By design, the sense of alienation should be lowered and the feeling of 
acquaintance supported with accommodation areas in order to provide the comfort of 
“home” and an organization of the beach area [21]. 
Conversely, in Köprülü Kanyon, USAID defined the place as “one of the nation’s 
prime outdoor recreation resources,” with planning to promote a successful outdoor 
experience with viewpoints and photo stops alongside sport activities. Thus, the 
5
SHS Web of Conferences 63, 12001 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/20196312001
MODSCAPES 2018
 experience of a tourist was to be embodied within the park not only as a spectator of 
the nature but also as a performer within this “challenging” national land [22]. 
Architectural themes within the parks were another topic in the designs of USAID. 
For instance, in Olympus National Park, near Antalya, it was emphasized that the area 
should not be affected by “modernity”. The architecture should have features such as 
“modern use of traditional materials and basic colours in simple forms and “the human 
scale of a regional architectural style must be consistent throughout the development. 
There will be no attempt to copy the traditional or classic architectural motifs or to mock 
natural forms” [23]. In Bergama National Park, which consists of the archaeological 
ruins of ancient Pergamon City, the architecture should not suppress the monumentality 
of the ancient city. “Conscientious design can create this contrast through the use of 
plain surfaces, light structures, open spaces, human scale”. Again there is an emphasis 
on functional design to avoid “mocking the motifs of the historic structures or imitating 
the forms or textures of nature. Simplicity will be the keynote.” Rather than being part 
of the landscape these buildings should be distinctively separate from nature and the 
ruins, yet they should be inviting in their “self-sufficient” and human-scaled designs, 
avoiding an impression of monumentality [24]. 
 
 
Fig. 1. Aerial view of the Bergama National Park Master Plan [24]. 
 
6
SHS Web of Conferences 63, 12001 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/20196312001
MODSCAPES 2018
 As for Köprülü Kanyon National Park near Antalya, the “architectural theme should 
recall the native building style in a modern vernacular. Masonry walls, large porches, 
and sheltering roofs found in the village house are appropriate features for park 
structures” [22]. In the history of architecture, modernity is always detached from 
tradition and the vernacular by emphasizing that the vernacular idea is also unstable 
and also part of a political discourse. The vernacular can be seen as the primitive phase 
of architecture in relation to the place and its defined identity. That use of “modern 
vernacular” from a team of US and Turkish experts is important to emphasize here.  
 
Conclusion 
 
In Uludağ National Park, taming the landscape through modernist features and 
declaring victory over nature were the dominant discourses while in USAID projects, 
the national park idea and the modernization project were strongly related with the local 
and vernacular ideals. In these examples we see different forms of modernization 
discourses through the countryside.  
In the American national park idea, these lands were defined as democratic 
territories and as a home for the nation [25: 9]. Even though they promoted the idea as 
a democratic landscape for everyone and drew a picture of “home” which underlines 
the terms of belonging and identity, in practice it produces a dichotomy of inclusions 
and exclusions by accessibility in preserved areas. The national park was promoted as 
“America’s Best Idea”6 with the emphasis on “you”. The citizens of America, whoever 
they are, own those landscapes. This mode of thinking allows for setting roots on a 
more democratic ground. In Turkey there has been some resizing of the boundaries of 
national parks and disruption to the unity of the lands by construction projects. The 
national park idea is not only about protection of common grounds, but also a way of 
reading into the policies and philosophies of the sovereign state. Once they were a part 
of nationalist writing; now they are threatened by the government which is emphasizing 
nationalism in different ways. As an example from the AKP government, establishing 
new national parks while destroying others can exist at the same time7. With the law of 
2014, the protective features of national parks have been threatened and the former 
idea of protection has been lost under the push for development. Infrastructure projects 
have started to be seen as a part of pristine lands8. However, these topics should be 
discussed in another arena where the agency of nature and non-human actors are in 
focus, while rivers, mountains and elements of natures can earn the same legal rights 
as humans [26].  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This paper forms part of a master class called “Trans-National Histories of Modern Architecture 
and Urbanism” by Professor Sibel Bozdoğan in the Architecture and Urban Studies Master 
Programme at Kadir Has University. Therefore, I would like to thank my professor for encouraging 
																																																						
6 It is a movie about National Parks in America, produced in 2009 by Ken Burns. 
7 If we follow the latest National Parks that established in the AKP era, there is a focus on 
former war areas as an emphasis on national history. Like the Battle of Sakarya National Park 
(2015), the Battle of Malazgirt Historical National Park (2018). So, the protection reasons of the 
national parks can be another paper topic. 
8 A highway within the boundaries of Gallipolu National Park has been built. 
7
SHS Web of Conferences 63, 12001 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/20196312001
MODSCAPES 2018
 me to write about this topic. I would also like to thank to Murat Tülek, Berra Zeynep Dodurka and 
Charles Ali Wagner for their precious contributions to this paper.  
 
Brief Resume 
 
Asya Ece Uzmay is an architect who graduated from İstanbul Technical University in 2016. She 
continues her studies in Architecture and Urban Studies Master Programme at Kadir Has 
University, İstanbul. She is currently working as a research assistant in the department of 
architecture in the same university. Her recent research explores the water and the water 
infrastructures in İstanbul with a focus on the social, political and historical aspects. 
 
References 
 
1. VEST, G.G. (MO) 1883. “Sundry Civil Appropriation Bill”, Congressional 
Record (47th Congress, 2nd session), vol. 14/3: 3488. Retrieved from: 
https://archive.org/details/congressionalrec47eunit/page/n744 [available on 
January 10 2019]. 
2. NASH, R. F. (1967) 2014. Wilderness and the American Mind, Yale University 
Press. 
3. SCHAMA, S. 1995. Landscape and memory, New York, Vintage Books. 
4. COSGROVE, D. E. 1998. Social formation and symbolic landscape. Madison, 
(WI), University of Wisconsin Press. 
5. SCOTT, J. C. 1998. Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the 
human condition have failed, Yale University Press. 
6. CRONON, W. (ed.) 1996. Uncommon ground: Rethinking the Human Place in 
Nature, New York, W.W. Norton and Company. 
7. USAID PRESS OFFICE, 2009. USAID Helps Establish First National Park in 
Afghanistan [Press release], April 23. Retrieved from 
https://www.usaid.gov/news-information/press-releases/usaid-helps-establishfirst-national-park-afghanistan
[available on 2 January 2018]. 
8. SMITH, A. D. 1986. The Ethnic Origins of Nations, Oxford, Cambridge, 
Blackwell. 
9. ÖZKAN, B. 2012. From the Abode of Islam to the Turkish Vatan: The Making 
of a National Homeland in Turkey, New Haven (CT), Yale University Press. 
10. KEZER, Z. 2011. “Memleketi Tahayyül Edebilmek: Erken Cumhuriyet 
Döneminde Milli Eğitimin Maddi Kültürü” [Envisioning a Hometown: The 
Material Culture of National Education in the Early Republican Period], in 
Dosya, n° 27: 79-87. 
11. COATES, P.; BEINART, W. 1995. Environment and History: The Taming of 
Nature in the USA and South Africa (Historical Connections), London - New 
York, Routledge. DOI: https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203133552 
12. BONNEMAISON, S.; MACY, C. 2003. Architecture and Nature: Creating the 
American Landscape. Routledge. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203402030 
13. TBMM. 1956. Orman Kanunu [Forest Law], 3078. 
8
SHS Web of Conferences 63, 12001 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/20196312001
MODSCAPES 2018
 14. Birleşik Amerika’da Milli Parklar [National Parks in the United States] (1953). 
Arkitekt, n° 259-260: 97-102. 
15. BURSA KENT KONSEYI [The City Council of Bursa], 2013. Gazete 
Sayfalarında Bir Zamanlar Uludağ [Once upon a time Uludağ, in the 
newspapers]. 
16. Cumhuriyet Newspaper (1932). 
17. Cumhuriyet Newspaper (1936). 
18. İNAL, S. 1945. Yeşil Bursa Denizinde İnci Uludağ [Green Bursa Sea Inci 
Uludag]. Hüsnü Tabiat Matbaası. 
19. URRY, J.; LARSEN, J. 2011. The Tourist Gaze 3.0. London, SAGE 
Publications. 
20. NATIONAL PARK PLANNING TEAM, 1971. Halicarnassus Seashore National 
Park: Master Plan for Protection and Use. Ankara, USAID/T. 
21. NATIONAL PARK PLANNING TEAM, 1972. Kovada Lake National Park: 
Master Plan for Protection and Use. Ankara, USAID/T. 
22. NATIONAL PARK PLANNING TEAM, 1971. Köprülü Canyon National Park: 
Master Plan for Protection and Use. Ankara, USAID/T. 
23. NATIONAL PARK PLANNING TEAM, 1971. Olympus Seashore National 
Park: Master Plan for Protection and Use. Ankara, USAID/T. 
24. NATIONAL PARK PLANNING TEAM, 1970. Pergamum Historical National 
Park: Master Plan for Protection and Use. Ankara, USAID/T. 
25. GREBOWICZ, M. 2015. The National Park to Come. Stanford (CA), Stanford 
University Press. 
26. ROY, E.A. 2017. “New Zealand Gives Mount Taranaki Same Legal Rights as 
a Person”, The Guardian (22nd December). Retrieved from: 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/dec/22/new-zealand-gives-mounttaranaki-same-legal-rights-as-a-person
[available on 13 January 2018]. 
9
SHS Web of Conferences 63, 12001 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/20196312001
MODSCAPES 2018
