the image of the primitive 
in black letters 
edward margolies 
Since colonial times American authors, both Black and White, for 
reasons peculiarly their own, have concerned themselves with the image 
of the Negro as a primitive. Over the centuries the cult of the primitive 
has had a very mixed American reception, particularly as regards its 
applicability to the races. Hence the portrayal of Negroes reflects not 
only changing cultural attitudes, but changing racial attitudes. It will 
be the purpose of this paper to examine some of these changes especially 
in the light of the ways Black authors have attempted to cope with them. 
But before doing so it will be first necessary to arrive at some kind of 
definition of the term "primitive." 
In accordance with popular American literary usage, ''primitive'' 
usually connotes a dark skinned person—an Indian, a Negro, a southern 
European type, or sometimes, as Leslie Fiedler suggests, a Jew—who 
cannot or will not submit himself to the rule of reason, to the restraints 
of western civilization. He lives close to his emotions, impulses or 
nature and sees these as ends in themselves. In the nineteenth century 
no self-respecting White American would acknowledge such an identity 
since it implied a hindrance to "progress," however ambivalently progress 
may have been regarded.. The first White primitives could therefore only 
sneak through the back door in disguise as it were—as folk figures out 
of an innocent past (like Daniel Boone), or as antebellum figures out 
of a past innocence (like Huck Finn), or as refugees from and carriers 
of civilization (like Natty Bumpo) or as partakers of Nature in order 
to discover or rediscover transcendental meaning (like Henry David 
Thoreau and Walt Whitman). It was not until the twentieth century 
that the White primitive could overtly celebrate himself as himself. 
The emergence of twentieth-century White primitives (of which 
Ernest Hemingway's heroes, Norman Mailer's White Negroes and present 
day hippies are perhaps the most egregious examples) was undoubtedly 
catalyzed by a reaction to the end of the frontier and the triumph of 
67 
 urban civilization. For primitivism is after all the decadence of the 
supercivilized since real primitives (if they exist at all) are by definition 
too unselfconscious to be aware of themselves as "alienated" and would 
not of course be "primitive" in the romantic sense of being psychologi­
cally unfettered—quite the opposite. Only persons living in a society 
that promises an individualism it cannot satisfy and who consequently 
feel at some remove from a sense of themselves or a sense of over-all 
purpose can afford the luxury of that fantasy. Hence the cult of the 
primitive attained unexpected popularity in the twentieth century since 
the new American city dweller, enmeshed in the complexities of urban 
life, still subscribed to ideals of individual freedom and social mobility 
that seemed more realizable in an earlier pastoral America. 
In this respect it is interesting to note the role of the first White 
primitive in vaudeville. (Wild West shows, minstrel shows, Black musi­
cal comedies and occasionally vaudeville had been portraying non-Whites 
—Negroes and Indians—in accustomed primitive status for some years.) 
Vaudeville, according to one of its best interpreters was a truly city 
entertainment, the performance of which unconsciously and ritualistically
celebrated the pace, the glamor and the myths of success of the city 
as opposed to the more stable, conservative values of pre-urban America.1 
Joe Knowles, a middle-aged, part time illustrator, acquired nation-wide 
notoriety as an author and vaudeville attraction after a much publicized 
stunt in 1913 in which he had gone naked into the Maine woods and 
emerged forty-one days later in blooming health having lived, he said, on 
berries, trout, venison and partridge.2 What is striking here is not 
Knowles' feat (which was probably faked) but that within the very 
institution intended to exalt the sophistication of the city there appeared 
now an immensely popular figure who represented (however vulgarly) 
quite the opposite appeal. Joe Knowles and later Edgar Rice Burroughs' 
Tarzan (1914), both of whom reverted to a simple life, are probably the 
principal "pop" precursors (unless, of course, one wants to include Jack 
London and Teddy Roosevelt) of White primitives, Hemingway, et al. 
Which may in part explain what Langston Hughes later called the 
"vogue" of the Negro in the 1920's.3 Negroes, after all, were primitives 
to begin with. 
The stereotype of the Negro as primitive is by and large a product 
of the romantic imagination although certain aspects of the stereotype 
may be traced as far back as Elizabethean times. Prior to the nineteenth 
century the justification for Negro slavery was seldom maintained on 
purely racial grounds although the Negro was generally thought to be 
inferior. Nonetheless, the liberal and democratic tendencies of the 
eighteenth century appeared to presage the end of the slave trade and 
the eventual freedom of chattel. Unfortunately this process was arrested 
with the invention of the cotton gin (1792) which created additional 
demands for slave labor in newly settled areas west of the Appalachians. 
68 
 Not surprisingly, the advent of western expansion coincided with the 
appearance of a new romantic literature extolling the primitive in 
Nature and Man. Ironically, the celebration of the primitive was 
ultimately put into the service of a plantation economy and the contin­
ued oppression of the Negro was held justified. 
The romantic obsession with the primitive was originally directed 
toward the Indian, but by extension all darker races came to be included. 
The image of the primitive as possessing an unsullied innocence was one 
to gladden any heart engaged in the world's work. Moreover the fantasy 
of the dark primitive gave identity-hungry White Americans a status they 
might not otherwise have achieved in a still unformed society. Insofar 
as the primitive presented no immediate threat to the White man's 
physical survival or emotional needs, he became an object of veneration, 
love and delight, as in Cooper's romantic portrayal of dying Mohicans 
or John Pendleton Kennedy's idyll of happy, contented slaves.4 When, 
however, there existed a real or imagined competitiveness between the 
races, Negroes and Indians were attributed the very inverse of Rousseauistic
traits, and came to be regarded as malevolent, destructive, treach­
erous and depraved. The extent to which American authors projected 
their own repressed Dionysian impulses onto darker peoples cannot, of 
course, be measured. James Baldwin notes the startling transformation 
of the portraiture of the American Negro after the Civil War in the 
following terms: "Uncle Tom, the trustworthy and sexless needed only 
to drop the title 'Uncle' to become violent, crafty, and sullen, a menace 
to any white woman who passed by."5 Baldwin's indictment of post Civil 
War American authors is not however altogether accurate. So long as 
the Negro remained a pariah even after emancipation, he represented 
no real danger and certain lovable, primitive traits continued to be 
patronizingly described. Thus the superstitious, banjo-plunking, water­
melon-stealing, mischievous innocent has remained a standard figure in 
American letters up thorugh the 1930's—notably in the works of Thomas 
Nelson Page, Joel Chandler Harris, Stephen Crane, Vachel Lindsay, Carl 
Van Vechten, Booth Tarkington, Du Bose Heyward, Octavus Roy Cohen 
and a host of others. 
What Vachel Lindsay once described as the Negro's "basic savagery" 
has, nonetheless, always existed somewhere latent in even the most idyllic 
portrayals of American Negroes by White authors.6 In Mark Twain's 
Pudd'nhead Wilson, for example, the young mulatto who has been able 
to pass himself off as a White behaves like a scoundrel, and his Black slave 
mother, a formidable sympathetic creature, despairs that it is his Negro 
blood that is to blame for all his villainy. Perhaps the ambivalent atti­
tude of White American authors is best unconsciously symbolized in 
Stephen Crane's story, "The Monster." In this tale a Black servant risks 
his life to save a White boy from fire, but in so doing, is burned so 
hideously that everyone, White and Negro, shuns him in revulsion and 
69 
 horror. Here possibly lies the basic dilemma of the White author in his 
treatment of the Black American. On the one hand, his conscience, good 
sense and American creed compel him to recognize the Negro's human­
ity; on the other hand, so much of the aura of the "monster" has been 
created about him that he is unable to do so. Sometimes the image of 
the good-innocent, bad-violent primitive is combined and focused on a 
single figure, as in Ernest Hemingway's short story, "The Battler." Here 
the peripatetic Nick Adams stumbles across an ex-prize fighter whose 
devoted Negro companion must from time to time knock him uncon­
scious in order to save him from harming himself and others. A similar 
confusion of motifs may be seen in Faulkner's Light in August, where the 
presumed mulatto, Joe Christmas, who has committed rape and murder, 
becomes a Christ figure. 
Not unaccountably, Negro authors too have appropriated the double 
image of the primitive in describing members of their race. Despite the 
fact that the American Negro community obviously possesses cultural 
features peculiarly its own, it has also taken cultural cues from the domi­
nant White civilization. Hence, like White American authors, Negro 
writers not only describe characters whose identity is insecure, but bear 
the additional onus of portraying members of their race about whom 
peculiarly contradictory conceptions exist. These conceptions do not, of 
course, conform to the Negro's psychology as they could not conform to 
that of any living human beings.7 Yet had the Negro author been able 
to cope with these issues, he would still have had to face the problem of 
his reading public, White or Negro. Until recently, to succeed financially, 
he would have had to win over White readers. Dare he violate their 
sensibilities, their prejudices, their preconceptions of what he and his 
people were like?—so far as they are alike? Were he to attempt to reach 
only Black readers (and there have been too few of them), would they be 
sophisticated enough to understand what he was trying to say? But what 
was he trying to say? Being an American, he tended to submit, some­
times unconsciously, to the stereotype of the primitive that a White 
society had imposed upon him. To this day Negro writing abounds with 
both minstrel figures and LeRoi Jones type savage avengers. It is a short 
span of time from the darkies and pickaninnies of Thomas Nelson Page 
and Joel Chandler Harris to the "Mandys" of Paul Laurence Dunbar and 
the Conjure Woman Tales of Charles Waddell Chesnutt. Nor is the time 
span much greater from the miscegenating monster of Thomas Dixon's 
The Leopard's Spots to the criminal murderer of Richard Wright's 
Native Son. Not only has the Negro writer frequently succumbed to these 
images, he has often vigorously averred that his portrayals of Black life 
are more authentic than those offered by White authors. But however 
true this may be, the fact that Black writers portray their characters as 
primitive does not in itself insure that the richness and complexity of 
Negro life has been adequately treated. 
70 
 The concept of the Black as uncivilizable is so woven into the very 
texture of American society that even when Black authors are not writing 
about Black life, they frequently make some allusion to Negro primitivism—if
only to deny its applicability to themselves. Thus Phillis Wheat-
ley celebrating her passage from Africa in eighteenth-century Boston 
writes, "Twas a mercy brought me from my Pagan land."8 And nine­
teenth-century Black antebellum abolitionist authors, propagandists and 
agitators direct their arguments as often as not against the view of Negroes 
as simple children incapable of comprehending the ways of the White 
world, a view promulgated by countless contemporary popular novels. 
For here really lay the ultimate basis not only for slavery but for the very 
real oppression, social, political and otherwise, free Negroes suffered in 
the North. With the exception of Melville, whose Benito Cereno showed 
both sides of the primitive coin (Blacks as murderous avengers and as 
fawning, devoted darkies), it rarely occurred to American authors that 
the conditions of life under which Negroes lived seemed almost malevo­
lently designed to produce the kind of Sambo personalities (at least in 
the presence of Whites) they loved to portray.9 But if Black abolitionist 
authors understood the social basis for the stereotyped version of Negro 
psychology, the first Black balletrists seen not to have understood, and as 
a consequence depicted Black life in the mirror image of White authors. 
Beginning with William Wells Brown's Clotel (1853) and extending 
to include some of the women novelists of the 1920's—Gertrude Sanborn, 
Nella Larsen, Jessie Fauset—Negro authors frequently produced heroes 
and heroines of elevated manners and morals who could and often would 
boast of the White blood in their veins, as if by implication the possession 
of unadulterated African blood were assurance of primitive traits. The 
post Civil War narrative poet Alberry Whitman (1851-1902), for exam­
ple, who once called for an end to all Uncle Toms and Topsies nonethe­
less portrayed his lower class Blacks in this fashion, whereas his noble 
central characters possessed large infusions of White blood. Likewise a 
Negro doctor in Frances Harper's lola Leroy (1892) is described as owning 
"blood of a proud aristocratic ancestory . . . and generations of blood 
admixture had effaced all trace of his Negro lineage."10 
The first real flowering of Negro letters occurred in the years 18901915
which Robert Bone, in The Negro Novel in America (1964), aptly 
describes as a period dominated by authors of middle class values. But, 
significantly, "middle class" here really means anti-primitivistic. Like 
their predecessors, Negro authors of this period were so possessed of fears 
of racial inferiority that they practically wrote themselves out explaining 
the infinite superiority of persons of mixed blood and of impeccable 
bourgeois manners. ("A like number of no other race in this country, 
their equals financially, could approach these Afro-Americans in gallant­
ry and orderly demeanour.")11 Worse yet, even allowing for occasional 
realistic flourishes, they often portrayed lower class Blacks as either comic, 
71 
 childlike contented slaves and peasants (like much of Paul Laurence 
Dunbar and a subsequent school of dialect poets) or as a race apart which 
no civilized person would want to associate with. Rarely (as in only a 
few of Dunbar's poems) did the innocence of the Black peasant emerge as 
a kind of self-possessed integrity. More typical was the class snobbery of 
James Weldon Johnson, the best of the early novelists who writes 
". . . refined coloured people get no more pleasure out of riding with 
offensive Negroes than anybody else would get."12 And W. E. B. DuBois, 
the most militant of Negro spokesmen of the first part of the century, 
has as his novel's heroine a peasant girl of slothful, degraded standards 
who must acquire an almost classical Northern education before she can 
become a race leader.13 
Pathetically, the caricatured Negro was perpetuated as well in the 
new Negro theater that had begun to flourish around the turn of the 
century. Issuing in part from Black minstrel shows, this theater was a 
kind of musical comedy that played unfortunately to White city audi­
ences until around 1910. From this distance it is sometimes difficult to 
assess how much of the humor belonged to a broad vaudeville tradition, 
how much was a catering to White racial tastes and how much lay in­
herent in a native Black culture. But a glance at some of the titles of 
these shows may suggest the ways Negro performers exploited their 
particular brand of primitivism: A Trip to Coontown, Clorindy—The 
Origin of the Cakewalk, Jes Lak White Folks, The Policy Players, The 
Sons of Ham, In Dahomey, Bandana Land, Rufus Rastus. Possibly some 
of the material contained a kind of folk satire that only the very knowl­
edgeable would discern. Commenting on the comic duo Williams and 
Walker (the one being "the slow-witted, good-natured, shuffling darky," 
the other, "the sleek, smiling, prancing dandy"),14 James Weldon John­
son wrote that as a team "they achieved something beyond mere fun; they 
often achieved the truest comedy through the ability they had to keep 
the tears close up under the loudest laughter."15 But even Johnson had 
to admit that because Negro performers of this period faced predomi­
nantly White audiences they were subject not only to a number of re­
straints, but were required to do "a good many things that were distaste­
ful" since it was thought these would please the customers.16 It was thus 
a thin line that divided folk satire from the kind of self-ridicule (or selfhatred)
that descends to primitive caricature—a line crossed and recrossed 
many times not only by Negro performers but by Negro authors as well. 
Harold Cruse in The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual (1967) suggests 
a number of reasons for the weaknesses of the Negro theatre in the Har­
lem Renaissance. Among these was the failure to find or seek Black 
playwrights to write plays for Black performers and Black audiences; 
another was the failure of a solid Black bourgeoisie to provide appropri­
ate institutional and intellectual support for the drama; and a third was 
the seduction of Black artists and intellectuals by "integrationists" on the 
72 
 one hand and White radicals on the other. Cruse adds perceptively that 
American Marxists' analysis of social conditions in the 1920's did not 
conform to the broader realities of American life and was especially 
irrelevant for the Negro community. But these observations are ap­
plicable not simply to the Black theater, but to Negro letters generally— 
which of course puzzles one as to why the Harlem Renaissance has be­
come so sacrosanct to Black critics and intellectuals (Cruse, among them) 
today. Allowing for its promise (according to Cruse) of molding a Black 
consciousness, creating or defining a cultural philosophy that would give 
identity to the Black nation and hence to the larger America—the fact is 
that the Renaissance failed these objectives for the reasons Cruse cited. 
And the achievement of a subsequent generation of Black writers seems 
incomparably greater not only aesthetically but in terms of discovering 
or rediscovering a Black identity. 
But the point to be stressed here is the psychological one. The cen­
turies old, ingrained primitive stereotype so stuck, that strive as Negro 
writers might, they could only re-express it—not, to be sure, as the min­
strel or the one dimensional comic darky—but as one variation or another 
of the noble savage. In other words, the Black man of the 1920's was 
portrayed not unlike the near extinct Indian of the nineteenth century. 
It was a portrayal that delighted both Black and White writers, and that 
both employed to excess. For the city-weary White middle class, surfeited 
with the moral ardor of the Progressive era of which World War I must 
have seemed the logical bloody culmination, the fantasy of the insouciant, 
rhythmic, libidinal Black possessed grand appeal. As regards White in­
tellectuals, nurtured now on Freud, Jung and Gertrude Stein's Three 
Lives (by way of Picasso's cubism, fauvists and African sculpture), they 
too were entranced by the "idea" of earthy, lower class Blacks—taxi 
dancers, pimps, prostitutes, jazz musicians, peasants, domestics and so on 
—whose simple natural virtues remained untouched despite the cares, 
tensions and materialism of the post-war period. Curiously, with the 
exception of DuBois and a few others, Black intellectuals failed to object 
to the new picture. Indeed they thought they had once and for all 
disposed of the old stereotype, but in effect they had only substituted one 
primitive for another. 
None of the above is intended to imply the Renaissance was simply a 
reflex action to White cultural trends. Obviously Negro writers were 
responding, however vaguely and stumbling, to deeply felt spritual needs. 
Adversity had made them politically and culturally aware, and they were, 
for a host of historical reasons, attempting for the first time to come to 
terms with themselves as a people. In certain respects they succeeded. By 
focusing attention on the Black masses, sans ridicule, condescension or 
apology, they paved the way for a more realistic assessment of Negro life. 
And by averring pride in their ancestory and African roots, they acknowl­
edged for the first time that self-recognition as Black men had for them 
73 
 at least as high a priority as some of the more abstract ideals they pro­
fessed to believe in. Even those authors who portrayed their characters as 
crudely primitive did so from a sense of bitter pride that they were at 
least not so corrupt or spiritually ravaged as their White oppressors. But 
Renaissance writers did, from time to time, transcend primitive stereo­
types to produce characters who were at once believable and Blackperhaps
the best examples being some of the roles Jean Toomer wrote 
for his play "Kabnis" in Cane. Yet one is struck more by the persistence 
of the stereotype than its transcendence in say, the fiction of Rudolph 
Fischer or Claude McKay, or even the lower class Blacks of Nella Larsen's 
Quicksand. And where poets like Countee Cullen or Claude McKay 
carefully avoid the stereotype, they run to older models such as Keats or 
employ traditional verse forms. Which of course only begins to suggest 
how psychologically dependent most Negro writers were on cultural 
images outside the Black community. 
In Black Manhattan James Weldon Johnson inadvertently reveals 
that this dependence was not necessarily related to White financial sup­
port or patrimony. From 1910-1917, he writes, when Black theater com­
panies were producing their own plays in Harlem for exclusively Black 
audiences, they invariably performed "crude Negro burlesque" or 
"white" plays—"downtown [Broadway] successes." The burlesque be­
longed to that "older tradition" of Negro theater that used to play to 
largely White audiences, while the Broadway dramas could scarcely be 
regarded as depicting the realities of Negro life.17 In his autobiography, 
Claude McKay recalled how in the twenties his White friend and col­
league on the radical Liberator, Max Eastman, discouraged him from 
writing "Negro stories straight and unpolished,"18 which explains in part 
Langs ton Hughes's statement in his autobiography that most Negroes in 
Harlem in the twenties did not even know a Renaissance existed.19 They 
did not, one suspects, because the new primitive often promulgated by 
Black writers as the New Negro reflected Negro life as they imagined 
White authors would see it. For a newly arrived peasant people attempt­
ing to survive a complicated urban society, the image of the carefree, 
romantic, hedonistic Negro did not make much sense. There were, to be 
sure, authentic flashes and a few successes in the literature of the twenties 
(as noted above), but these were often rendered cruelly inaccessible to 
Blacks—just as Duke Ellington's rich ethnic music was played in a Har­
lem cabaret that barred Negro patrons. 
However else it may be regarded, the Renaissance in portraying 
Negroes as noble, earthy creatures rendered the last of the accruals of 
the primitive metaphor. Most subsequent authors,-Black and White, have 
played only variations on this image while some have bypassed primitivism
altogether. The Depression decade, as is well known, produced a 
dearth of Negro writers primarily because of hard times. But the few 
Black authors who did manage to publish, frequently merged their Negro 
74 
 characters racelessly with other bottomdog figures of American society.20 
A major exception was the author, Richard Wright, whose Black pro­
tagonists in his novellas, Uncle Tom's Children (1938), despite their 
nascent or expressed Communism, were nationalists under the skin, 
whether Wright liked to think so or not. For the purposes of this paper, 
however, Wright's importance lies in the fact that in his next published 
work—the novel, Native Son (1940)—he became the first Black writer to 
use the pejorative image of the primitive. Heretofore the Negro as beast 
or savage savage had been almost the exclusive province of White South­
ern apologists like Thomas Dixon whose portrayal of Blacks in the second 
of his anti-Negro novels, The Clansman (1905), was unfortunately popu­
larized ten years later in D. W. Griffiths' film, "The Birth of a Nation." 
Bigger Thomas, the central figure in Wright's novel, was a sullen anti­
social killer, one of whose victims was a sympathetic White girl, thereby 
arousing a variety of deep-seated, racial-sexual anxieties in both his 
readers and most of the White characters in the book. Wright's point of 
course was that the ghetto, and the caste system generally, produced the 
kind of savages Thomas Dixon liked to write about. But by unleashing 
Bigger's hatred in print, Wright also seemed to be unleashing several 
kinds of subject matter hitherto regarded as inappropriate for Negro 
authors to write about. After Wright, interracial love, homosexuality, 
the Negro criminal, Black racism and a host of other themes were no 
longer taboo, and the Negro author has felt free as well to use or dispose 
of the primitive image in any way he pleased. Indeed the Invisible Man 
of Ralph Ellison's 1952 novel is invisible precisely because, in the course 
of his adventures, he has attempted to embody a variety of primitive roles 
(all of which are disguises) that White men expect of him. With the 
upsurge of nationalism in the late 1950's and the present decade, some 
Negro authors—most notably LeRoi Jones—have turned once again to 
Wright's savage savage Bigger as a working model. Their reasons are 
presumably political, certainly not aesthetic: to arouse Blacks to a mili­
tant pitch, and, possibly, to terrify Whites. But unless the political author 
is especially adroit with his images, he may find he is contradicting him­
self. Hence, Eldridge Cleaver (Soul on Ice, 1967), who as an ex-convict 
has himself personified the savage savage, may celebrate the Negro's 
immense sexuality in one essay and then bewail the oppressed Negro as 
a "eunuch" in another. 
Perhaps the most bitterly acute observations on Negro primitivism are 
made by the protagonist, Jesse, in Chester Himes's little-noticed novel, 
The Primitive. The primitive, he remarks, is really the invention of the 
so-called civilized who want to dehumanize others less fortunate than 
they. In America's topsy-turvy system of values the truly civilized are 
called primitive and the uncivilized consider themselves human. Having 
just committed an act of violence, Jesse muses, he is now entitled to join 
the "human race." 
75 
 No more worrying about what's right and what's wrong. 
Just what's expedient. You're human now. Went in the 
back door of the Alchemy Company of America a primitive, 
filled with things called principles, integrity, honor, con­
science, faith, love, hope, charity and such, and came out 
the front door a human being, completely purged. End of 
a primitive; beginning of a human. Good title for a book 
but won't sell in America with the word human in it. . . . 
But they'll know damn well you're human. Be in all the 
newspapers: Black man kills white woman. Not only nat­
ural, plausible, logical, inevitable, psychiatrically com­
pulsive and sociologically accurate and politically correct 
as well. Black man has got to have some means of joining 
the human race. Old Shakespeare knew. Suppose he'd had 
Othello kiss the bitch and make up. Would have de­
humanized him.21 
It would probably be too much to expect the early demise of Negro 
primitivism in American letters, but should this happen, it will signal 
not simply the passing of a literary fantasy, but, more significantly, the 
passing of an American nightmare. 
footnotes 
1. See Albert F. McLean, Jr., American Vaudeville as Ritual (Louisville, 1965), 1-16, 38-65. 
2. For more about Knowles see Roderick Nash, "The American Cult of the Primitive," 
American Quarterly, XVIII (Fall 1966), 520-538. 
3. Langston Hughes, The Big Sea (New York, 1963), 334. 
4. An excellent study of the origins of American racism may be found in "Par t One. 
GENESIS 1550-1700" in Winthrop D. Jordan, White Over Black (Chapel Hill, 1968). 
Generally speaking the "bad" Indians in Cooper's Leatherstocking Tales are little better 
than demons: fierce, cruel, savagely destructive and conscienceless. T h e "good" Indians recog­
nize that white men are intended as new masters of the land. In The Pioneers (1823), Chingachgook
tells Elizabeth Temple, "Daughter, the Great Spirit gave your fathers to know how to 
make guns and powder, that they might sweep the Indians from the land. There will soon be 
no redskin in the country." John Pendleton Kennedy's complaisant slaves in Swallow Barn 
(1832) are echoed in works by other antebellum, pro-slavery authors, such as William Gilmore 
Simms, W. A. Carruthers, Beverley and George Tucker, John Esten Cooke and Caroline Lee 
Hentz. 
5. James Baldwin, Notes of A Native Son (Boston, 1962), 28. 
6. The other traits Lindsay attributes to Negroes in "The Congo" (1914) support the 
minstrel stereotype: "Their Irrepressible High Spirits," " T h e Hope of Their Religion." 
7. A good example of the former is the 1961-62 Broadway success, Purlie Victorious (sub­
sequently made into a movie, "Gone Are The Days") by Ossie Davies. Although intended as a 
burlesque of Southern racial mores, Black actors perform their roles in broad folksy caricature. 
In Douglas Turner Ward's Day of Absence and Rod Maclver's God Is A Guess What, both of 
which have been produced in repertory in recent years at New York's Negro Ensemble Com­
pany, the actors don masks or White paint and play Whites as caricatures. Although the masks 
make their obvious political and social points, one suspects the imaginative capacities of the 
authors of these plays remain to a certain extent caught u p in the minstrel image regardless 
of their satirical intentions. 
8. "On Being Brought From Africa To America," The Poems of Phillis Wheatley, ed. 
Julian D. Mason, Jr. (Chapel Hill, 1966), 7. I n another poem, " T o T h e University of Cam­
bridge In New-England," 5, she describes Africa as a " land of errors and Egyptian gloom" 
from whose "dark abodes" she mercifully escaped. 
9. In Stanley M. Elkins' controversial Slavery: A Problem in American Institutional and 
Intellectual Life (Chicago, 1959), the author argues that the Sambo personality may not have 
been simply a caricature, but a reality, a psychic means of survival for slaves made utterly 
dependent on their masters in the closed society of the plantation. A forceful challenge of this 
thesis may be found in Mary Agnes Lewis, "Slavery and Personality: A Further Comment," 
American Quarterly, XIX (Spring 1967), 115-121. But however right or wrong Elkins may be, 
76 
 the Black writer assumed Sambo's reality long after the Civil War. In his novel The Quest 
of the Silver Fleece, W. E. B. DuBois describes a Southern colonel's servant as "one of those 
constitutionally timid creatures into whom the servility of his fathers had sunk so deep that 
it had become second nature. T o him a White man was an archangel, while . . . his father's 
masters stood for God. He served them with dog-like faith. . . ." 
10. Quoted in Sterling A. Brown, Arthur Davis, and Ulysses Lee, éd., The Negro Caravan 
(New York, 1941), 139-140. 
11. Quoted in Hugh Gloster, Negro Voices in American Fiction (Chapel Hill , 1948), 32. 
12. James Weldon Johnson, The Autobiography Of An Ex-Coloured Man (1912). The 
quote is from the subsequent 1927 (Knopf) Garden City edition, 81. 
13. W. E. B. DuBois, The Quest of the Silver Fleece (Chicago, 1911). 
14. James Weldon Johnson, Black Manhattan (New York, 1968), 108. Johnson's historical 
sketch of New York Negroes was initially published in 1930. 
15. Ibid. 
16. Ibid., 171. 
17. Johnson contends that in this brief period of independence Negro performers experi­
enced for the first time an exhilarating sense of freedom. Yet he cites scarcely any instances 
where this freedom translated itself into productions intrinsically different from the kind that 
had once been performed for White audiences or were then being performed for White audi­
ences on Broadway by White theater companies. Pa r t of the exhilaration evidently stemmed 
from the fact that Negro companies, like T h e Lafayette Players, could now perform White 
plays like Madame X, The Servant in the House, On Trial, The Love of Choo Chin and others. 
Indeed, Johnson writes that "for a time Negro sketches and musical shows were swept off 
the stage, but they are now back again." (172.) Nonetheless the highest achievement of the 
Renaissance years may well have derived from the Negro musical theater which gave countless 
Black performers the opportunity to develop their talents. A glance at any list of actors, 
musicians, dancers and singers of this period will confirm what Harold Cruse has described as 
Harlem's important contribution to the American musical theater. But the point is that prac­
tically all the originality, ability and creativity came from the performers themselves and not 
from the written material they enacted. They literally transcended and transformed the hack­
neyed plays and productions in which they appeared. 
18. Claude McKay, A Long Way From Home (New York, 1969), 254. McKay did not of 
course take Eastman's advice that he write his Negro tales in verse, but the characters he 
describes in his first two novels (Home to Harlem, 1928, and Banjo, 1929), free wheeling, 
happy-go-lucky and libidinal, provide ample illustration of the Renaissance primitive stereo­
type. In his autobiography McKay insists that they are realistically drawn and regrets that his 
"damned white education has robbed me of much of the primitive [italics mine] vitality, the 
pure stamina, the simple unswaggering strength of the Jakes of the Negro race [Jake is the 
hero of Home to Harlem]." (229.) One cannot help thinking however that it was McKay's 
"damned white education" that prevented him from seeing his Negro characters in greater 
depth. 
19. Langston Hughes, The Big Sea, 228. 
20. A not uncharacteristic poem of this period is Robert Hayden's "Speech." See Negro 
Caravan, 407. 
Hear me, black brothers, 
White brothers, hear me: 
I have heard the words 
They set like barbed-wire fences 
T o divide you, 
I have heard the words— 
Dirty nigger, poor white trash— 
And the same voice spoke them; 
Brothers, listen well to me, 
The same voice spoke them. 
21. Chester Himes, The Primitive (New York, 1955), 159. 
77 
