alexander kern 
an analysis 
and interpretation 
My first encounter with Alexander Kern was so characteristic of the 
man that I have retained it through the more than twenty years 
which have intervened between that time and the present. I was just 
about to be discharged from the army and was inquiring about programs 
in American studies at several different institutions. All but one replied 
courteously enough, but with typewritten letters obviously based on 
standardized forms. But I did receive one painstakingly handwritten 
reply which carried with it the aura of a uniquely personal and 
unpretentious human being, a quality that is rarely encountered in the 
process of making application to an institution. That letter had a 
great impact on my life for it decided me on a graduate school and thus 
determined the angle from which I would approach my profession for 
the rest of my life. And I was not wrong, as it turned out, to give such 
great weight to that letter. Alex Kern, as I came to know him as teacher 
and friend, always sustained that sense of the person, conveyed to me 
at first glance by his unforgettable hand. 
Alexander Kern was born on September 23, 1909, and grew up in Erie, 
Pennsylvania, graduating from Erie Central High School in 1925. 
After Honors in English at Yale (1930) and an M.A. (1933) and 
Ph.D. (1936) in History at the University of Wisconsin he came to the 
University of Iowa where, except for brief detours at Wisconsin and 
Allegheny College, and visiting professorships at the University of 
Maryland, the University of Ankara, Turkey, the University of 
Wisconsin-Milwaukee, the University of Wyoming and American 
University in Cairo, he has been for many years professor of American 
literature and chairman of the American civilization program. He was 
also a Fulbright lecturer in Hyderabad, India in 1969. Under his 
direction the American civilization program at Iowa developed from a 
pioneering enterprise into one of the major American studies programs 
in the country and it now has graduates teaching at colleges and 
9 
 universities all around the United States. Kern has also played an 
important role in the development of American studies on a national 
level, serving many terms in the leadership of sections and chapters in 
the Modern Language Association, the American Studies Association, 
the Mississippi Valley Historical Association and the Midwest Modern 
Language Association. 
Alex's scholarly writings have been quite varied. He has done texts 
like the Barnes and Noble outline of American Literature (with B. V. 
Crawford and M. H. Needleman) and the Scott-Foresman anthology 
Sources of the American Republic (with Marvin Meyers and John 
Cawelti); editions such as his Thoreau: Two Fragments and 
Huckleberries', literary analyses such as his "Dreiser's Difficult Beauty" 
and "Frost's 'The Wood Pile' "; theoretical and methodological 
discussions, historical studies, encyclopedia articles and many book 
reviews. This diversity reflects his wide-ranging curiosity, his openness to 
a variety of ideas and methods, and the remarkable interdisciplinary 
competence he has developed over the years. Yet, there have been two 
central threads woven in and out through his scholarly accomplishments. 
The first is his long-term interest in the relationship between 
literature and the social sciences, particularly the sociology of knowledge. 
Beginning with his 1940 article on "Emerson and Economics," and 
coming down to an interest in the work of Peter Berger which he has 
passed on to a number of his recent 
students, Alex has been particu­
larly interested in the reflection 
of ideological patterns in literature 
and with the ways in which the 
exploration of this relationship 
can help elucidate both literature 
and currents of belief and attitude 
in the society which produces it. 
His 1942 article, "The Sociology 
of Knowledge in the Study of 
Literature," which developed the 
implications for literary study of 
Karl Mannheim's work was a 
landmark in this field of study 
and a widely influential essay. 
Alex followed up his own 
methodological prescriptions with 
an exemplary study of "The Rise 
of Transcendentalism" in the 1955 Transitions in American Literary 
History. In this brilliantly systematic analysis, he used a wide range of 
materials to set forth with great clarity the changing patterns of 
thought which separated the various phases of the transcendentalist 
movement from earlier American ideologies. 
10 
 Alex's other great interest has been in the writings of Henry David 
Thoreau. He has produced a number of articles and is currently working 
on further material for the new Thoreau edition. It might seem a bit 
strange that Alex Kern, one of the most sociable men alive, should 
be so attracted to the writings of the great American hermit, yet Thoreau 
was not really that, but a lover of human society when it did not 
compromise his own integrity or impede his deeper relationship with 
nature. Perhaps it is this which has so attracted Alex to Thoreau; 
for Alex, too, has managed far beyond most other men to become a 
great teacher and friend, while remaining uniquely and ineffably himself. 
While the larger community of American studies scholars has known 
Alex primarily through his publications and his work in our professional 
organizations, those of us who have had the good fortune to be his 
students will never forget those classes and seminars, for Alex's style 
as a teacher is unique. It's not that he is a brilliantly charismatic lecturer 
or a rigorous systematizer who overpowers you with the intricate logic 
of his arguments. If he has a grand theory of American studies he has 
kept it well hidden all these years perhaps because he feels very keenly 
that his function as a teacher is to work with rather than on his 
students. Moreover, he has always been too curious about new 
intellectual developments to be satisfied for long with a particular 
methodological or theoretical formulation. But what he does offer more 
than any other teacher I've had is the sense of a personal reaction to 
literature and culture, of what I think Emerson may have meant by 
the phrase "Man Thinking." Alex brings his whole self in all its 
uniqueness to bear on the material before him. His commentary flows 
in a kind of associative free form pulling his wide and diverse range of 
knowledge into focus on the problem or book at hand. Sometimes the 
very spontaneity of his reflections leads to momentary gaps when he 
reaches for a reference or a concept that 
temporarily eludes him—"I'm blocking 
on that" used to be one of his character­
istic expressions—but this willingness to 
think aloud along uncharted paths was 
for us a symbol of his fresh and ever 
renewed delight in the play of thought. 
Alex gave us a model of thinking as the 
daring to be open to new possibilities. 
Yet his reflections, though open and 
inquiring and sometimes even hard to 
follow, were never woolly or ethereal, 
Behind them there was always an 
extraordinary range of humanistic 
learning, enriched by personal contacts 
and experience in many different 
countries, and an incisive critical intelli11

 gence which could be very tough and demanding. I've known Alex to 
spend many hours of his own time looking into his students' subjects. 
Sometimes he came to know the literature better than they did. It can 
be embarrassing to be handed an extensive bibliography of secondary 
sources that you should have consulted but didn't. 
Something of the Kern style comes across in the following Alexisms, 
a few of those which Ted Weissbuch playing Boswell gleaned from 
his notes on a course in Early American literature and kindly shared with 
me in a recent letter. They bear for me, as I'm sure they will for other 
former students, the stamp of the essential Alex, though they are not, 
of course, the same, without that quiet, insistent, somewhat droning, 
yet warmly engaging voice: 
My answer to your question will mislead you in the right 
direction. 
Definition of Calvinism: Everyone's afraid he's damned, but 
in the Old Testament everyone at least gets a share of 
heaven. 
On Jonathan Edwards: Here I'm not talking through my 
hat, because it's a foggy idea. 
On Benjamin Franklin: His career in our open society per­
mitted him to hobnob with kings. Being a shoemaker was 
no longer heredity. 
One of the chief indoor sports, historically, is soaking the 
government somehotv, as you may well know. 
Hamilton did not sit home and sulk when his ideas on the 
Constitution were turned down. 
Hooker was as sharp as a needle, and just as narrow. 
Whenever Charles Brockden Brown thought of his father, 
he got all burned up—spontaneous combustion, that is. 
Some of the writers—but not necessarily Edward Taylor— 
used the oxymoron—and were. 
No one is born with the knowledge of what the Gothic novel 
means. 
I have just returned from an American Studies meeting and 
heard three papers on the frontier that went from solid to 
brilliant. ' < j 
William Ellery Leonard did the Cambridge History of Amer­
ican Literature article on Bryant. Leonard was insane.,ibut 
no fool. 
James Fenimore Cooper is at the bottom of the top class of 
American novelists. Interest in him arose among scholars 
when they discovered Cooper had a mind. - l 
Cooper has a Quaker background, and they're not a very 
ritzy group. He was baptized in later life, but didn't just 
jump in. 
12 
 (Cooper) can make a story stand still for longer than almost 
anyone, there is no doubt. 
If we go off in that direction it will only lead us up a stump 
to no end. 
The Kern style is unique and inimitable, yet most of his former 
students have tried to take at least some of it into themselves. As one put 
it to me, "a good many of us whom Alex taught at Iowa, I can testify, 
have tried to take him as a model—even though trying to match his 
mixture of amiability, tact, receptiveness and intellectual rigor has been 
a thoroughly humbling exercise. Nobody with his crammed schedule 
could have been more accessible, patient and helpful toward us; 
nobody of his standing and achievement in American studies has been 
more generous-minded toward younger colleagues with new approaches 
to propose; nobody I've met from the Now Generation itself has been 
more up front." 
But the teaching and the dissertation advising were only one part of 
Alex's vital role in our lives. The other was his position as what another 
student refers to as the "perfect genuine host." Nobody ever gave more 
delightful parties than Alex and his wonderful wife, Jean, who is a 
superb scholar and teacher in her own right. Between the two of them, 
they have a genius for sociability which they have always used with 
particular generosity toward students. They created a special ambience 
of friendship and good conversation, a perennial salon where students 
and faculty could talk together outside the 
boundaries of classrooms and seminars. 
Who of my vintage in Iowa City will forget 
the old stone house on Market Street, and 
the many parties where Jean's punch and 
Alex's legendary collection of records formed a 
perfect background for the circulation of 
ideas? Most of the interesting people in 
Iowa City—all of whom Alex and Jean seemed 
to know—were there and approachable to a 
graduate student. The result was a social 
as well as pedagogical initiation of the 
graduate students in American Civilization 
into the larger intellectual community of the 
university on a level that I have seen at no 
other institution. It's a rare gift to a student to make him feel part of a 
university against which, in the normal course of events, he is 
struggling. Alex and Jean have done this for generations of students, 
and it is fortunate for all of us that they apparently feel this responsibility 
extends off campus as well. I never attend a convention without checking 
in with Alex in hopes of joining the interesting group he has put 
together out of students and friends for dinner at some particularly 
13 
 good restaurant—among his other talents Alex is the world's most reliable 
walking Baedeker. 
Alex's retirement from teaching seems surprising, not because it was 
sudden or unexpected, but because the sustained freshness of Alex's 
thought and the intensity of his interest in each new generation of 
students has made him seem eternally unchanging and youthful. Even 
now, retiring will certainly not mean the end of his work as scholar or 
of his career as host and friend. More than most men, Alex Kern 
exemplifies one of the maxims cited by his own great literary interest, 
Thoreau: 
They say that characters were engraved on the bathing tub 
of king Tching-Thang to this effect. "Renew thyself com­
pletely each day; do it again, and again, and forever again." 
I can understand that. 
John G. Cawelti University of Chicago 
(with the assistance of Ted Weissbuch) 
14 
