Robert Morgan Looking for Native Ground: Contemporary Appalachian Poetry In aletterto the author, Cornell University Professor Robert Morgan discusses his life and writing, noting: Appalachia has been called an island of the past, and while that is not entirely true by any means, there is a parallel perhaps between our sense of awakening and the relish of new freedom the New Englanders felt in the 1830s to 50s. There is that emerging from the rapt gloom of fundamentalism into the wide natural daylight. (Correspondence) Robert Morgan emerges into that wide natural daylight on every page of his 1979 book, Groundwork. The book is a journey, moving from high up in the mountains themselves, as Morgan contemplates the natural boundaries that have defined his unique mountain community, to the valley below where the people live and work. Like Jeff Daniel Marion, Morgan is a clear-eyed, meticulous ob- server of nature. He constantly seeks to understand how man fits into the scheme of things. The two men are equally attentive to detail and appreciative of natural mysteries. But there is also a marked difference in perspective. Whereas Marion sees man's connection with seasons and the rituals of life and growth, decay and death as positive, even as an anodyne for the pain that is the price of vision, Morgan seems to view nature in a more adversarial role. For him, the value lies in the struggle, as two powerful forces attempt peaceful co-existence. Morgan has written, "I believe in the anarchic and creative soil, and stick to the fringes of society, out where it comes into collision with nature, in the chaotic backwashes and countereddies" (Notes 37). Marion's world is an elemental order where know ledge, vision, and peace are possible; the darkness that we must acknowledge is "out there" beyond the creek, the woods, the garden. His relationship with the earth and his poetry is fiducial. For Morgan, the darkness is everywhere: nature embodies chaos, but so does imagination, and reason can give order to both. In "The Transfigured Body: Notes on Poetry from a Journal," he writes: The marginal and chaotic have promoted more permanence than the institutions of the majority ... Out of desperation comes the reck- lessness to get near enough to chaos for some fire, and out of alienation the patience to husband and direct it for the community. (34) 50 Morgan "The Hollow," the opening poem in Groundwork, begins in the marginal, chaotic mountains, explaining why the first settlers stayed there, charmed and transfixed by the beauty of the peaks rising around them. The ridges were "a screen I sent up from the oaks and hickories I to keep them hidden from disease I and god and government, and even time" (1). In "Fear," Morgan continues describing the people and places who make up his mountain community. In this wild, natural world, superstition reigns, and the natural entwines the supernatural. A flea circus of dust thrown up in the yard means the haints are near the ghosties roost like cocoons in the appletree. I've seen bones underground burn like filaments when passed over by high wires from town, in torment with the suffering of the elements. Everybody knows the waterfall is haunted by a woman strangled in her wedding dress back then; mushrooms are the fingers of the dead reaching though and crickets their moving eyes. Trash around the spring means one has tried to get back in there. (3) After a contemplation of the boundaries, the high mountain divides that separate this particular place from everywhere else, Morgan moves down to where the people are. Like Chappell, Morgan is a storyteller. He tells tales that have been told over and over. We sense that these stories are about real people. These are not the mythic, symbolic personages of some of Danny Marion's poems. Morgan's people have flesh and bone, and a little less beauty and grace. The flavor of oral tradition abounds; we picture evenings spent re-living these moments of family history. In Morgan's first story-poem, a man named Revis and his bride come to their newly built cabin after their wedding to spend their first 51 Looking for Native Ground: Contemporary Appalachian Poetry night together. Revis has built his cabin on a huge, flat rock, thinking this namral foundation would provide the best possible site for his home. But the rock was already home to a huge nest of rattlesnakes, and the first fire built for his new bride brings them out.4 It was she who wakened to their singing near the embers and roused him to go look. Before he reached the fire more than a dozen struck and he died yelling her to stay on the big four-poster. Her uncle coming up the hollow with a gift of bearham two days later found her shivering there marooned above a pool of hungry snakes and the body beginning to swell. (8-9) There are serpents in this Paradise, and man must always be on guard. Morgan continues his contemplation of snakes in the next poem, "The Flying Snake," in which the snake takes on mythic proportions and his great-grandpa, the Snake Killer, becomes an epic hero. A giant rattler had killed four settlers and many farm animals. Attempts to stop the cruel killer had failed. Morgan imparts human or super-human characteristics to the rattler, suggesting it always knows when the hunters are coming. Morgan's great-grandfather finally conquered the snake. He got a brilliant idea of tying his seine net around his team, and he rode out to meet the snake, standing up in the wagon. When the snake made a lunge at him, it got caught in the net and the old man was able to shoot him. The memory of killing the snake became a haunting nightmare for the old man. For the reader the snake is a powerful symbol of the darkness of nature and of the deeper question of how we account forit in God's world. Morgan leaves us wondering with these last lines. Years later he'd imagine spiders falling from the sky like snowflakes, 52 Morgan and mad dogs and angels in storms, and once in a nightmare he shot by mistake Jesus as he came through the east in Rapture light. (11) In that dark gloom of fundamentalism Morgan mentioned earlier, Jesus and his angels are a mystery in God's plan and arouse the same feelings of dread as spiders, mad dogs, and snakes, the dark sentries of the wild. There is danger in God's world, and Morgan constantly reminds us, not that we might pull away or limit ourselves, but that we might use the knowledge and heightened senses for greater awareness and self-knowledge. J. B. Merod writes: Despite the pretensions of intellect, wealth, or social position, nature equalizes us all; but Morgan goes beyond that knowledge to instruct us in the uses of disorder and catastrophe. In his view danger comes in many forms. Just as there is threat in privilege, there is also a threat in the status quo, in the weight of entrenched modes of thought and life. Against the inertia of habit, Morgan proposes to go with nature: to ride the waves and rhythms of natural process ... (57). Morgan's personal and family history weaves in and out of various poems as he comes to terms with his feelings about his past. Like Chappell, Miller, and Marion, he takes stock, as he approaches mid-life, of who he is and where he and his family have been. There is sometimes a glimmer of resentment for exploitive "outsiders," as in "Plankroad." Adolescent longing comes to life in "Bean Money" where the young farm boy plots his escape from the hard work and isolation of his mountain farm. After a summer of aching, sweaty labor, the father pays him his share of the season's profits. It is greedily stored away to finance, he hopes, a new life for himself. That consecrated metal was an abstract drawn off the soil and sweat and cast into a jewelry of values. I meant those struck emblems to act as compact fuel, like nuclear pellets, to power my long excursion out of the sun and beyond the ridges ... 53 Looking for Native Ground: Contemporary Appalachian Poetry ... the young summers become signs to be translated again into paper, ink and paper, in the cool timeless leisure I saw while washing my feet on the back steps. (31) But mostly, the talk of the past is gentle, tinged with pathos. "Mountain Page" is a re-evaluation or assessment poem. Here we see the speaker's understanding and sympathy for those who have gone before. We feel his sadness for the family-its hardships, suffering, unfulfilled dreams. Morgan writes: My people came from South Carolina by way of Mountain Page in the last century and suffered here long enough to build a church and leave a dozen graves in the crab orchard. one wasted years in search of a secret lead mine the Cherokees rumored was behind a cliff Another shunned his field to dig for gold that the millionaires at Flat Rock must have buried in the Civil War. (47) Now the narrator sees himself in these lives, sees his own failures and accepts those of his forebears. And I stop to let their haunt blow past and dew out in the weeds while I prospect and dig and bury expectations: my people prayed and dug and failed here too. (4 8) A dominant theme in Groundwork is man vs. nature, particularly the idea of the people in his family and community struggling with the forces of nature. In "Canning Time," the yearly rite of canning peaches becomes an ordeal, a trial that vexes body and soul. It is almost a battle scene. The canners do not partake in a religious ritual of communion with 54 Morgan nature, as we might see in Jeff Daniel Marion's world. They are women at war, fighting for survival. In that hell they sealed the quickly browning flesh in capsules of honey ... (20) In "Huckleberries" the suffering necessary to be part of nature is the underlying idea. The poet gathers berries with a friend called F. A., and he fears every buzz and hum. "Never trust the innocent twig in high I berry country; it may be stingworm I snake or walkingstick" (32). As they pick the berries "so few, so tedious to gather" (32), F. A. relates a tale which presents the most terrible image of nature invading the security of home-the darkness snuffing out the light and fire of the heart. A panther steals a baby from a cabin porch. A posse trails the animal to its den where the remains of the infant are found. This tragedy is contem- plated as they sweat and ache in the hot sun, gathering their sweet treasure. When they finish, they have paid a price, both in the tale and in the tedium of the labor. "The morning has been said and won, I hands bloody with sweet sun" (33). Another image that occurs in Groundwork is land left barren and useless. Morgan's memories of his childhood North Carolina are not a romanticized vision of lush, green fields and postcard mountain scenes. He remembers in "Milksick Pen" a place where a poison weed grows that will taint the milk of the cow who grazes there. A fence erected around the place allows the forest to flourish untouched by man or animal. And in "Smokehouse Dirt" the salt used to cure meat has created a sterile desert where neither animals, plants, snow, nor light can rest. Man and his appetites have left a scar. The shadow of the meat-hung roof puddles sterile as the site of Carthage. Rain will lick away the savor in about a century. The light cannot feel at home on this ground for a while, nor rabbits warm here at a hearth of vegetation. The scald won't even hold a drop of snow, but eats 55 Looking for Native Ground: Contemporary Appalachian Poetry away the lush crystals fast as heat. Where the smoked ham sweated and fatback wept its oils, and molasses cooked down to plasma in jars, erosion rubs brine in the wound same as a piss bum in the pasture. The lye tub drooled its whey also. Hunger has left a tear track, recondite among the thickets. (43) Morgan's persona remembers the hard times and backbreaking work of the farm life, and he is willing to let it go. The farm boy knows too well the stubbornness of mountain land, its reluctance to yield up its bounty. In "Secret Pleasures" he returns to fields he once worked and seems to rejoice in the land that is now being left to nature; the poet enjoys knowing that no one works this field. Though everyone else has had the good sense to abandon it, Robert Morgan, the poet, returns to find a new use for the land . . . . Let it scab and fur over on its own and offer no crop bigger than dew and the headwork of berrypicking. My secret pleasure: to come and watch these shoots work up their honey from bitter clay. Lichen gardens improve the scars, patching over history. I offer the land my leisure. (50) Not all the interaction with nature is portrayed as negative or dangerous, however. One of nature's most destructive elements-fire- becomes for Morgan a life force, a symbol of renewal. Fire fascinates him: this powerful image occurs memorably in "Bumoff," "Baptism of Fire," and "Burning the Hornet's Nest." We are reminded of his statement, "Out of desperation comes the recklessness to get near enough to chaos for some fire" (Notes 32). The fire is the imagination and the human spirit. Morgan has no patience with complacency; the poet must 56 Morgan live and think dangerously. With his poetry, Morgan means to build a little fire under us, like a good Baptist preacher. With this seeking of the light, Morgan is reminiscent of Marion. But his light is the light of a raging fire, as his interest in the scientific gives metaphor to an obsession with fire's power. In "Burnoff' fire is part of the work at hand, and it is a positive force. The fields are burned in the spring in order to kill the weeds and prepare the ground for planting. He presents and analyzes the event as if it were an experiment, some chemical process, a perspective that is pervasive in Groundwork. There is also a spiritual side, though, to the the burning of the fields. As though the conflagration summons dirt syrup and fire ink out of clay to irrigate anemic soil to pave the slope tar-black. The shadow will need to be turned like frying ham, sweet with baked larvae, wormeggs, roots. We rub the season's minstrel char on skin, and ask the land to hold its charge until we plug in seeds. (22) Fire is not the only metaphorical element in this poem; the work involved is also significant. The value of physical work is a recurring theme in Morgan's poems, as it is in Marion's. These poets remind us of the writings of Simone Well, the French philosopher who devoted much thought and energy to the contemplation of the relationship of work to the human soul. She believed that work and thought must combine to produce wholeness in society and the individual, writing: "If the whole spiritual life of the soul . . . and all the scientific know ledge acquired concerning the material universe are made to converge upon the act of work, work occupies its rightful place ... it becomes a point of contact between this world and the world beyond" (32). Preparing the field for planting becomes a point of contact with the world of the spirit through fire, literally and metaphorically, as the fire embraces the spirit seeking knowledge, wholeness, vision. The burning 57 Looking for Native Ground: Contemporary Appalachian Poetry field offers its own revelation to the poet/seer/scientist. It connects with an image in the poem about the burning hornet's nest that Morgan describes as a great burning eyeball (4 1 ). As Stephen Marion says in his essay: "Fire sweeps life, death, and decomposition together in one swift vision ... A certain essence, a signal, is revealed, as if the fire threw vision as it throws light" (25). That is why Gondan, the preaching fieldhand in "Bapti~m of Fire," argues with the conventional notion of water, symbol for the blood of Christ, as the only element with redemptive powers. Gondan says: The Word says it takes the Baptism of Fire to see the Kingdom ... Anyone that ain't rubbed clean by purifying flame better get his asbestos suit. (28-29) Morgan's image of fire dovetails with Fred Chappell's here, as we remember the poem "Bloodfire" when the father says, "Maybe hellfire is good for the South, a kind I of purgative. We could use a lot of that" (Midquest 62). The key word is purgative because Morgan and Chappell share the idea of redemption made possible by fire. All of us need to feel the fire occasionally to shock us out of our smugness, our laziness, our vulnerability to self-importance. For Morgan and Chappell, nature's most violent element, fire, seems to offer more power to change and renew than its quieter sister, water. Groundwork is no lament of the horrors inherent in the natural world or even the hell of burning imagination in the mind of a North Carolina farm boy. Morgan is not complaining. The voice is admiring, seeking understanding, questioning the source, and cataloging the mysteries of the scientific world. Morgan is the scientist/poet in the tradition of Henry David Thoreau or, more recently, Loren Eisley. As Stephen Marion has observed: For Morgan, science is a sense of new ground. He watches natural reactions and cycles and introduces human senses to form an experiment, a poem, to reveal the essential properties of all the ele- ments involved. The poem is a field laboratory, where measurements are done by hand and eye. It is a place where the senses of nature are 58 Morgan given life to react with the senses of man to produce a glow that is essence (27). Robert Morgan's latest effort, At the Edge of the Orchard Country, from Wesleyan University Press, is an even more developed expression of many themes and motifs found in Groundwork. In this book Morgan draws on memory, family stories, and local history of his North Carolina home, bringing grandparents, parents, aunts, uncles, and cousins to life in poem after poem, "recovering pieces of the morgenland" in a very thorough fashion (68). The book opens with a poem about Horace Kephart working in his tent on a chapter of Our Southern Highlanders, writing he does as repayment to his parents for all the years of college and all the blessings life afforded him. The poem and its theme of indebtedness become a metaphor for Robert Morgan and At the Edge of the Orchard Country- a repayment of a debt to the people and places who made him. Every poem in the first section is a broken twig on the twisted path of Morgan's memory of his childhood and family. "Passenger Pigeons" and "Buf- falo Trace" are about homing in and finding direction. The sleeper in "Feather Bed" dreams and drifts across space, time, years "Across the troubled Atlantic and centuries/toward a white immaculate garden" (7). Thomas Wolfe feverishly writing in his Brooklyn apartment is juxtaposed with a moonshiner back home in "Looking Homeward," directing our attention to the final poems in the section. "Halley's Comet" and "White Autumn" feature women in the family album whose words and lives informed Morgan's own. Indebtedness becomes the dominant theme of the entire first section, gratefulness for having "yet another spring he'd been I privileged to remember ..." (12). One important image from Groundwork, fire, and one important idea, the value of physical work, continue in At the Edge of the Orchard Country. Fire, heat, and light provide the central image in poem after poem. The burning intensity of a creative genius like Thomas Wolfe is held up beside the moonshiner's fire in "Looking Homeward." A comet, a swirling bomb of gases jetting though the night sky, is "a kind of promise of the continuance I of things in a broken world-" (12). In "Manure Pile" and "Dead Dog on the Highway," the heat of fermentation 59 Looking for Native Ground: Contemporary Appalachian Poetry is the focus. From the tiniest light of all, the lightning bug, to the emotional heat of a "hot and vivid" (29) revival in a country church, fire of any kind is important to Morgan, suggesting the possibility of renewal, promise, and positive energy. In "Nail Bag" we learn of the pioneer practice of burning a barn down for the nails. This was necessary in order to move on to new, more fertile land. The settlers would arrive with their reclaimed nails, bum the logs that were cleared from the new claim, scatter the ashes and reap a bountiful harvest. Fire again brought a new beginning, a place for another generation. As though all husbandry and home were carried in that charred handful of iron stitches, blacksmithed chromosomes that link distant generations. (61) As in the work of the three poets previously discussed, the value of physical work is a predominant idea in Morgan's book. In the world of the farm, people do not sit idle, or worse, in front of the television. They do not have time for aerobics, jogging, or analysts. There is much to do, and the people Morgan brings to life for us are busy. They rake, sweep, plow, plant, clean off the cemetery, tend their land and animals. Even a little boy like the young Robert Morgan could not spend too much time dawdling. He says, "I had other lives also, and work to do" (41). In "Harrow" the work of plowing takes on cosmic importance, as the finished new ground is "the planet's newest field" (38). And in "Field Theory" work as a preserver of sanity and innocence is the underlying idea. I like to think they found in work soil subliminal and sublime, Their best conspiracies were two breathing in the night ... (68) The second section of the book focuses on nature's sights, sounds, and smells-from manure to spring flowers, lightning bugs, the air itself- then the poet moves us easily, quietly into childhood memories of church services, hiding in potato holes, visits with relatives, a boy's first attempt to plow. Morgan is mining his memories for insights into his character, 60 Morgan the whys of his own journey through life. There is the same exciting mix of scientific knowledge and terminology in the poetry that we saw in Groundwork. These lines from the poem "Brownian Motion" offer an example. The air is an aquarium where every mote spins wild and prisms the morning light. Lint climbs sparkling on convection's fountain, and magnetic storms boil away like gnats bumped by molecules. Every breath swarms the clear spores, ions seethe, magnified in playful flight. (23) Section three, the last, is a continued regression into the past, beyond Morgan's personal memories, to a historical tracing of a more cultural memory, and his indebtedness to the collective experience of his forefa- thers and mothers. These poems chronicle the life of the early pioneers, with descriptions of how the early settlements were set up, how land use was parcelled out, and what role the Indians played in the past of the Appalachian mountains. Showing his mastery of complex poetic forms, Morgan writes about his grandfather using a very difficult old French form, the "Chant Royal." The technically formidable form requires five stanzas of lllines each, followed by an envoi. Each section ends with a refrain. Morgan's "Chant Royal" is a hymn of praise and a prayer, a fitting close to any ceremony-hence its position as the next-to-last poem in the book. The poem recounts the life of Morgan's grandfather, born weak and fragile. Only determination on the part of his mother kept him alive. Her strength not only saved him but also prepared him for a hard life. When the grandfather was finally able to buy a piece of land of his own, Morgan tells us "he sank a well through rock-weathered debt depression, set groves, I Adequate for survival withstanding all knocks" (67). This last line becomes an underlying theme for the entire collection, as the envoi enlists the help of higher powers in living a life of integrity. 61 Looking for Native Ground: Contemporary Appalachian Poetry Guardian ghost inhere herein before Jove may this music honor his example improve my time as he invested his and no less unorthodox discover significance in the bonds his fate wove adequate for survival, withstanding all knocks. (67) Memory. History. Imagination. Science. These are the subjects of At the Edge of the Orchard Country, the entire collection a fermentation of Morgan's complex system of interests. Like the other poets discussed here, Morgan acknowledges and honors memory's place in literature. But his distinction lies in his successful blending of science and poetry. He may be the answer to I. A. Richard's ideal, discussed in his famous essay "Science and Poetry," in a book by the same name, published in 1926. As Richards pointed out, science alone can only tell us how things behave, how the universe exists and operates; it cannot tell us why. Science cannot tell us what we are, what the world is. That is the poet's job. Survival in the modem scientific world requires that the scientists and poets not tum away from each other, but instead become more alike. In a letter to the author, Robert Morgan has written, "In my own case I feel equally moved by the old hymns at baptizing and quantum mechanics" (Correspondence). That might serve as a motto for him in one sentence. His sense of adventure, his desire for order and understand- ing, and his quest for vision are equally satisfied in poetry and science. 62