1922.] GIFTS TO THE SOCIETY. 319 MAY MEETING THE stated meeting was held on Thursday, the nth in stant, at three o'clock, p.m., the first Vice-President, Mr. Lord, in the chair. The record of the last meeting was read and approved. The Librarian reported the following accessions: From Miss Georgiana Weld Sargent, of New York, thirteen volumes of newspapers, edited by her father, the late John Osborne Sargent (H. C. 1830): The Boston Daily Atlas, July 1 to Sept 11, 1834. Morning Courier and New York Enquirer, Nov. 21, 1837, to March 29, 1839. The Battery, Washington, published at the instance and request of the Whig Executive Committee of Congress, a complete file from July 6, 1848, to Jan. 29, 1849. The Republic, daily, Washington, June 13, 1849, to Aug. 27, 1853. Messrs. A. C. Bullitt and Sargent edited the paper until their disapproval of the policy of the Administration in regard to the Galphin Claims, when Mr. Allen A. Hall became editor until Sept. 11, 1850, when on the death of General Taylor, Mr. Sargent resumed the editorship tintil June, 1853. The Weekly Republic, Washington, May 23, 1850, to July 24, 1851. The Signal, Washington, devoted to the support of Winfield Scott for President, and William A. Graham as Vice-President, from July 1, to Sept. 11, 1852. From James Lawrence, the original manuscript by William H. Prescott, of Vol. Ill of his Philip the Second. From Miss Maiy Lincoln Eliot, of Cambridge, nine letters and two fragments, written by Jeremy Belknap to Rev. John Eliot, April 19, 1777, to March 20, 1786. From Henry W. Cunningham, an order of Gov. Francis Ber nard, Sept. 23, 1762, two papers, 1765, relating to the administra tion of the Estate of Joseph Crocker, late of Barnstable, and a number of books, pamphlets and broadsides. From Charles H. Taylor, Jr., an account, kept by John Phillips of work done in digging a trench and finishing breastworks at Castle William. From Mrs. Albion D. Wilde, of Canton, by deposit, an old 320 MASSACHUSETTS HISTORICAL SOCIETY. [MAY, plan of the Mill property of Col. Paul Revere, on the East Branch of the Neponset River in Canton, formerly the Government Powder Mills, bought by him in 1801. The plan shows Revere's dwelling-house, various buildings, Leonard and Kinsley's iron works, and several dams. From Albert H. and Florence L. Moore, by deposit, a letter of Horatio Gates to Artemas Ward, March 6, 1776, and three commissions, to Nahum Ward, as Ensign, June 24, 1807, and as Captain July 14, 1810, and to Ithamar Ward, as Justice of the Peace, June 10, 1819. The Cabinet-Keeper reported the following accessions: From Mrs. Kingsmill Marrs, a lead pencil made by Henry David Thoreau at Concord, Mass., probably about 1840, when for a short time he applied himself to the craft of his father, John Thoreau. It is stamped "J. Thoreau & Son. Concord Mass.," and was given by Miss Ellen Emerson to Miss Frances L. Norcross then living in Concord, who in turn gave it to Mrs. Marrs. From Henry W. Cunningham, a framed photograph of the old West Church, Cambridge Street, Boston, of an interior, and of its last minister, Dr. Cyrus A. Bartol; also a photograph of the last horse-car in Boston, discontinued in December, 1900; and several engravings. From Miss Catharine Austin, of Newport, R. I., a Franklin medal, in silver, awarded to James T. Austin, of the Centre Grammar School, in 1793, this being the second year of the awarding of these medals. From William O. Comstock, of Brookline, the medal of Harriet Beecher Stowe. From William L. Willey, the medal of Holborn Restaurant, London, presented to the Members of the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company at the time of their visit there in 1896. By purchase, the medal of Joseph Hodges Choate, issued by the Century Club and the American Numismatic Society, 1922. James Truslow Adams, of Bridgehampton, New York, was elected a Corresponding Member of the Society. Announcement was made of the appointment of the follow ing Committees: House Committee: John W. Farlow, Frederic Win throp, and William C. Endicott. I922]. ROBERT SAMUEL RANTOTJL. 321 Finance Committee: Francis R. Hart, Grenville H. Norcross, and Arthur Lord. Library Committee: Edward Stanwood, Charles Pel ham Greenough, and Charles K. Bolton. Committee to publish the Proceedings: Henry Cabot Lodge, Arthur Lord, and Edward Stanwood. It was voted that the income of the Massachusetts Histori cal Trust Fund for the last financial year be retained in the Treasury, to be expended in such objects as may seem de sirable to the Council of the Society. The Vice-President, announcing the death of Robert S. Rantoul, a Resident Member, said: Our associate, Robert Samuel Rantoul, died at Beverly Farms on the first instant. He was elected a Resident Mem ber on February 13, 1908, and was present at most of the meetings until March, 1917, his last attendance. In Janu ary, 1909, in his first communication to the Society he gave his reminiscences of Abraham Lincoln. In March, 1914, he presented and read the report of the Council of the Society. In March, 1915, he wrote a letter to the President relating to the defeat of the biennial elections measure before the Massachusetts General Court in 1884, which was printed in the Proceedings. Other communications were the Memoirs of William P. Upham, John Noble, William Endicott, and Thomas Franklin Waters, beside the tribute to Henry Fitz Gilbert Waters, printed in the Proceedings as his Memoir. Mr. Rantoul served as a Member of the Council from 1911 to 1914. Mr. Ford read the following tribute: Robert Rantoul came to America from Middleton, Kinross, Fifeshire, in 1769, the first of the family to migrate. Not willingly, for he was a victim of the press gang and came in a British ship of war. Leaving the service he settled at Salem, following the sea until he was lost in 1783 at the age of thirty in the wreck of the Iris, a vessel owned by William Gray, Jr. His son Robert (1778-1858) * held a number of 1 In the Historical Collections of the Essex Institute, v. are printed extracts from a ms. reminiscences of this Robert Rantoul, 1848-1858, 32 2 MASSACHUSETTS HISTORICAL SOCIETY. [MAY, local offices in Essex County and a grandson Robert (1805 1852) took an active part in western railroad development and attained national prominence, succeeding Webster in the Senate of the United States. He lived to attend only one session, hardly sufficient time to test his standing in that body. His son, Robert Samuel Rantoul, was born June 2, 1832. Though born in Salem and long a resident of Salem he passed his early years in other places. That he associated in his youth only with his elders he considered unfortunate, but that probably hastened his early development and did not interfere with his education, which took the usual course, through dames' schools, the Beverly Academy, the Boston Latin School ? "a bright chapter in my life," he records ? where he became practised in public speaking. He entered Harvard, where he " took no rank " as he says himself, and was in Dane Law School 1854-1856. In 1856 he came to Salem and was at once interested in local politics and in the Fremont campaign of that year. He was a member of the legislature at twenty-six, collector of the port at thirty three, mayor at fifty-eight, and from i860 to 1889 and after 1892 he held no public office except for two years in the General Court (1883-1884). A republican from 1855, in 1888 he became a democrat, believing that his old party was abusing the confidence of the public. To have seen a place like Salem grow for more than sixty five years was in itself an experience. The shipping in terests gave way to manufactures and the city of 1922 was hardly to be associated in spirit with that of 1856. To keep alive an interest in its history and to preserve the records of the ruling families of the past was the task which a small circle of Salem citizens set out to accomplish. There had been a "Social Library" since 1770, rich in scientific works, to which Bowditch the great mathematician acknowl edged his indebtedness; there had been an Essex Historical Society since 1821, merged in 1848 into the Essex Institute, and printing Historical Collections since 1859. In more re cent times the leading spirits were Henry Wheatland, Abner C. Goodell, Jr., Henry F. Waters, and William P. Upham, ? to name a few ? who were thoroughly imbued with the historical fervor and entirely competent to dig out what was 1922.] ROBERT SAMUEL RANTOUL. 323 of value from the records of the past. Mr. Rantoul made some early contributions to the Collections, the first appear ing in 1863. They concerned the Rantoul family, or notes on the topography of Salem and the environs, or biographi cal sketches of members of the Institute. In 1882 he tried a higher flight in a paper on the Essex Junto, and after re tirement from public office he turned more seriously to historical writing, finding a congenial occupation and de served reputation. As President of the Institute from 1896 1904 he made a number of contributions, setting a good example to others. It was in his presidency and with his countenance that his able colleague, Mr. George Francis Dow, enlarged the printing activity of the Institute and inaugu rated a series of historical volumes that have made Essex one of the best known counties in the Commonwealth. His last visit to the Massachusetts Historical Society, to which he was elected a member in 1908, was a year ago. He then showed little evidence of age, still erect in carriage, and with the ruddy face, bright eye, and steady walk which I remember at my first meeting with him more than twenty years ago. He was a ready speaker, an inheritance of his early years, and possessed an accurate memory for names and dates. His readings in history were almost entirely on local lines, but in them he held his own among antiquarians, the more because of a certain assertiveness in his pronounce ments. He was of Scotch blood and a conviction once taken was well-nigh unshakable. He would listen to arguments on the other side of a question but rarely saw reason to change his opinion. His writings are touched with the orator's methods, read as if they were intended to be spoken rather than printed. They may have reflected the editorial tone, for he had at one time been a writer of leaders for the Transcript, and had been offered the editorship in 1875. I*1 conversation he had a fund of memories and anecdotes with a distinct personal flavor and a strong sense of humor, and when tapped it flowed so freely that at times he would laughingly offer a half apology. In later years he became deaf and this restricted his social pleasures as well as his attendance here. In 1916 he printed for distribution among his friends a volume of Personal Recollections, but it deals 324 MASSACHUSETTS HISTORICAL SOCIETY. [MAY, rather with experiences in Europe than in Salem. Perhaps he felt that in his many contributions to historical publica tions he had given sufficient of his Massachusetts relations. Yet there is room to regret that he had not used his years of leisure to write more systematically an account of his life. He was born five months before Jackson was elected to his second term, had seen frequently Daniel Webster, had been commissioned collector of customs in the port of Salem by Lincoln, and had been deprived of office by the influence of General Butler. In any other community Mr. Rantoul would have been regarded as a public feature, for in his full eighty-nine years of life he had seen the modern world de velop, associated with many who are accounted notable and great, and yet preserved a certain intimate connection with this world of change, at times warmly sympathetic with the movement that had made the Massachusetts of his youth a thing of memory only. It was with a consciousness of early promise and as early performance that he wrote: " If it [my life] gave promise of more than it has made good, I may plead that, as a race, we mature early." The high qualities of the man may best be seen in the history of the Class of 1853 which he prepared in 1913, a fine apprecia tion of his classmates and broad in its outlook on life. Dr. Shattuck made the following statement: There were recently discovered in the house of my brother, Dr. George Brune Shattuck, a mass of old letters and accounts which proved to be those of my ancestor, Caleb Davis, of Boston. They numbered several thousands and were in their " original packages," probably not having been disturbed since they were filed more than a century ago. They extend from 1761 to 1797 and contain much of eco nomic history, for they describe the mercantile operations of a Boston merchant of wide connections. In colonial days his operations were carried on with the southern colonies, a few of the West Indies and in an occasional adventure with England or the Mediterranean, all under the rule of the navigation laws of that time. With him were associated in shipping voyages three brothers, Amasa, Joshua and 1922.] CALEB DAVIS PAPERS. 325 Nathaniel. The War for Independence interfered with the regular course of trade and irregular voyages to neutral islands in the Caribbean Sea or to France or Holland be came the rule? involving great risk of capture and loss of ship and merchandise. After the peace of 1783 new trade connections were sought and the operations of Caleb Davis were greatly expanded. In the 8o's and 90's he traded with Malaga, Lisbon, Cadiz, Amsterdam and Rotterdam, Nantes and Bordeaux, Glasgow, London, Liverpool, Bristol and Newry, and St. Petersburg ? a truly formidable list, be sides his transactions in the West Indies and the Southern States. From such material history is written, and while names of writers count but little, there were found letters or accounts from John and Samuel Adams, Washington, Heath, Gerry, Gideon Hawley, Paul Revere, Samuel Osgood, Hector St. John, Nathaniel Gorham, Rufus King, and Nathan Dane, on public matters as well as private business. Recognizing the historical value of the collection my brother and myself present it to the Society to form a part of the Davis-Shat tuck collection already here. Dr. J. C. Warren exhibited, with brief remarks, a colored English caricature by Gillray (1801), on the use of the Perkins Metallic Tractor. Mr. Norcross read the following letter of Jefferson Davis, at Beauvoir, Mississippi: To James Cephas Derby Beauvoir, Harrison Co. Missi. Oct. 6th 1878 J. C. Derby, Esqr. My dear Sir, ? I have the pleasure to acknowledge yours of the 26th Ult. also the two books, and interesting magazines which you had the kindness to send to me. I do not think you have previously mentioned to me anything of " the copy of Confederate Records belonging to Mr. Gerry," probably you did so in a letter to Major Walthall. I thank you for offering to borrow them for me, and if you will do so, they shall be carefully returned as soon as no longer required for my work. 326 MASSACHUSETTS HISTORICAL SOCIETY. [MAY, I seldom hear directly from Major Walthall, for he has not only been very hard at work, but recently has not been quite well. It is to be hoped that circumstances will soon permit him to return. The time is near at hand when frost may be expected at Memphis and the effect it produces has usually been felt for several degrees of latitude south of the place where it occurred. We are here surrounded by it, and the circle steadily narrows, but my residence is so isolated that we may fairly hope not to be invaded by the infection. The disease however had this year some characteristics hitherto unknown, and the suffering has been, and is more general and severe than that of any previous epi demic. The noble generosity of the Northern people in this day of our extreme affliction has been felt with deep gratitude and has done more for the fraternization of which many idly prate, than would many volumes of rhetorical assurance. Again thanking you for your very kind courtesies, I am, Respectfully and truly yours, Jefferson Davis Mr. Tuttle presented, in behalf of Mr. Stimson, who was unable to be present, the Army Portfolio, No. i, by Capt. Daniel Powers Whiting, of the Seventh Infantry, U.S.A., containing five colored lithographs of the Army Camp near Corpus Christi, Texas, October, 1845, and posi tions about Monterey, in September and October, 1846; also the Landing of the U. S. Army under General Scott on the Beach near Vera Cruz, March 9, 1847, drawn by Lieut. Charles C. Barton. With these Mr. Stimson also gave four large contemporary photographs of the battlefield of Gettys burg, July, 1863, by F. Gutekunst, Philadelphia. These were given to Mr. Stimson by his late father-in-law, Major Richard L. Ashhurst of Philadelphia, who was First Lieu tenant and Adjutant of the 150th Pennsylvania Volunteers (Bucktail regiment). Major Ashhurst was " promoted Cap tain by brevet for meritorious services at Pollock's Mills and at the battle of Chancellorsville . . . and Major of Volunteers by the brevet for distinguished gallantry at the Battle of Gettysburg," where he was seriously wounded and invalided after the first day's battle. Mr. Francis R. Hart read a paper on Sir Henry Morgan, based upon a chapter in a forthcoming work. 1922.] JAMES FORD RHODES. 327 Dr. R. M. Lawrence read extracts from a volume about to be published by him on town life in Boston. In recognition of the resignation of Mr. Rhodes of the Vice-Presidency at the annual meeting and his approaching departure for an extended stay in Europe Mr. Ford said: Mr. Rhodes: ?You have been a member of this Society for nearly thirty years and a Vice-President for eighteen years, exceeding in length of service all of your predecessors in office. You entered in the presidency of Dr. Ellis and took an active part in that of Mr. Adams. You are among the small number of members who, by sharing in the direc tion and responsibilities, are familiar with the traditions and permanent policy of the Society. The Society honored you by admitting you and by conferring such offices and duties as it required of you. You, in turn, have honored the Society by performing what it asked and by giving to it the weight of your name and profession. As an historian we recognize your authority; as a r?iember of the Society we have accepted and rewarded to the extent of our power your service; as an officer we have admitted your devotion to duties and functions; as a man we have given proof of our esteem; as a friend, we have bestowed our affection. I doubt if in the long list of deserved honors you have received, there is any one from which you have derived so many con stant reminders of pleasant association and wide usefulness. In interrupting, temporarily we sincerely trust, your intimate connection with us, we give you every wish for ? the best, at all times and in all places. Here you will always find a welcome and full comradeship. 328 MASSACHUSETTS HISTORICAL SOCIETY. [MAY, MEMOIR OF MELVILLE MADISON BIGELOW By WILLIAM VAIL KELLEN Melville Madison Bigelow was a survival of a race of scholarly lawyers now almost, if not quite, extinct in the United States. He was born in the middle West, came East to pursue his legal studies, and was best appreciated in England. He was one of a small group of American lawyers Who have achieved international distinction in the field of pure scholarship. A Nobel prize in literature has never been awarded an American. Professor Bigelow perhaps came as near as anyone to fulfilling the requirements for such a prize by his researches into the beginnings and growth of the Common Law. He was quite different from the modern legal specialist, who exhausts, and is exhausted by, the narrow field to which he devotes his meticulous powers, therefore misses the massive sweep of legal growth for the finespun distinctions set up in particular cases. Henry Wheaton, reporter, diplomatist, and writer on International Law, Mr. Justice Story, teacher and writer on Commercial and Constitutional Law, and Mr. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, legal author and orator, the first named reporter and the last two members of the greatest Court in Christen dom, more nearly of the American Bar approached in their influence on great branches of the Law the learning and influence of Professor Bigelow. Professor Bigelow devoted his entire life first and last to the study, teaching, and exposition of well nigh the whole body of the law which defines the civil rights and duties of HS 1922.] MELVILLE MADISON BIGELOW. 329 the English-speaking peoples. He brought to his life task an unusual combination of talents. He was a born student and investigator; he was a tireless worker; he possessed un usual powers of analysis; and in addition he was gifted with imagination, the historical sense, and a philosophic temper. He mastered the Common Law; he gained a profound knowl edge of the Civil Law; and he was said to be versed in the Law Ecclesiastical. The itinerant life of the Rev. William Enos Bigelow brought him with his wife, Daphne Florence Madison, to Eaton Rapids, a village in the southern central part of Michigan, just north of Jackson. Here was born Melville Madison Bigelow on August 2, 1846. With a keen interest in genealogy and with becoming pride he traced his descent, as vouched for by the College of Heralds, from Edward the First, and showed his pride in his descent by becoming a member of the " Baronial Order of Runnymede." His immi grant ancestor was one John Bageley, said to have settled in Watertown, Massachusetts, in 1640, whence Melville's branch of the Bigelow family went West and early settled in the lower peninsula of Michigan. His mother was said to be of Virginia stock, as evidenced by her maiden name of Madison, and was, like many another circuit rider's wife, a woman of remarkable character, energy and ability. From both his parents Melville inherited an uncommonly vigorous body, and a tough, keen and well balanced brain with unusual ambition and capacity for prolonged literary work. Like many another Methodist ministers' son, young Mel ville was every year or two carted with his family from one parsonage to another, varied in his case by absences from home, now at school and now with an aunt, his father's sister, " at the old Bigelow home " near Milford. His uncle, Joseph Enos Bigelow, a graduate of Ann Arbor, who taught school at Milford and became a lawyer, would seem to have influ enced his nephew in steering him towards college and in the choice of a profession. At some time during his youth, perhaps to pay his way at school and college, he showed practical sense and sagacity in carrying on with a friend a highly profitable business in the making and sale of hickory bows and arrows. These youthful experiences made for 330 MASSACHUSETTS HISTORICAL SOCIETY. [MAY, early development, mental and physical, and at the end of his fifteenth year he was ready to enter Michigan Uni versity. A portrait of him at this period discloses a frank and winning personality, about which there was nothing particularly striking, " Except that he seems to have been better looking, more athletic, better behaved and more popu lar than most of his companions." He graduated with his Art's degree in 1866, and entering upon his legal studies he received his law degree in 1868, and in due course his Master's degree in 1871, all from that in stitution. Upon leaving the University he went to Pontiac, Michigan, to continue his law studies for a brief period with a Judge Baldwin. Meanwhile his uncle, Joseph Enos, had gone to Memphis to practise law, and, upon his invitation, Melville joined him there and was admitted to the Tennessee Bar. It was speedily apparent that he was ill fitted for the clashes of active practice, least of all for the rough and tumble life at the bar of a South-Western State. On one occasion his mild and gentle personality only would seem to have saved his life. Another Memphis lawyer had for some reason threatened to shoot him, and, according to a friend would have done so, " if it had not been for Melville's quiet, gentlemanly manner." Early in his Memphis career young Bigelow was fortunate enough to strike his m?tier and to begin his real life work in the profession. By a fortuitous chance or fate he was engaged to assist in the making and publishing of H. Clay King's Tennessee Digest. To further the presswork he came to Boston, probably in 1869, to read the proofs. Here for the first time in the libraries of Cambridge and Boston, in freest contact with books on every line of legal research, he saw the opportunity and felt the call to a life of legal scholar ship. During his stay in Boston he met and married Miss Elizabeth Bragg and with her returned to Memphis. Impa tient to continue his studies he came back to Boston in 1870, made his home in Cambridge, and buried himself in an alcove in the Social Law Library, then in its cramped quarters in the Old Court House on Court Street. Mr. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, who was much in the library at the time and through similarity of bent and 192 2.] MELVILLE MADISON BIGELOW. 331 studies came to know and appreciate this eager young scholar out of the Middle West, wrote of him at this period that he was much " impressed by the disinterested love of scholarship that led to his counter-emigration East ward to get access to the materials that he wanted. With out riches he accumulated a part of those materials, and gave to the world his very valuable Placita Anglo-Norman nica. I saw a good deal of him in! those early days but recall no special incidents. I remember mainly his genuine untiring interest in his work for its own sake." Coinci dently he took a graduate course in Harvard University which covered a number of years. Dr. Charles W. Eliot said of him: " I have never known any young man who deliber ately undertook the pursuit of higher education for so long a period. He must have entered the University of Michi gan about 1862, for he obtained the degree of A. B. in 1866. It was not until 1879 that he obtained at Harvard his degree of Ph.D." When this scholarly young Methodist had settled in Cambridge and Boston, it was natural that he should come into confidential relationship with Boston University, then newly chartered under the auspices of that aggressive de nomination. The question of establishing a School of Law in connection with that institution was discussed, and in 1871 the Board of Trustees appointed one of their number together with young Bigelow to investigate and report upon the feasibility of so doing. In January, 1872, he made a favorable report and in the September following the school was started at 36 Bromfield Street, the Methodist head quarters in Boston. The able and learned faculty was made up of former judges, active practitioners, and legal scholars, of which last named he was one. This was for tunate for him, as it assured him a modest livelihood while he pursued his studies and entered upon his career as a legal author; it was fortunate for the University as it re sulted in a flourishing and influential Law School, begin ning with fifty students in 1872, and reaching seven hun dred in 1922, numbering among its graduates many leaders of the bar and judges of courts of last resort. Professor Bigelow was now twenty-six years of age, but 332 MASSACHUSETTS HISTORICAL SOCIETY. [MAY, looked and acted much older. He had matured early in mind and body, and had begun to show in his appearance the effect of his years of toil by night and day. He did not thereafter change essentially in appearance throughout life except that his hair grew gray and the stoop of his shoulders more pronounced. He had become and remained a typical student of the midnight oil and of an elder day. He had the long and roughly kempt hair, the gentle voice, the abstracted air, the inflamed eyelids, the weary eyes, the habitual eye-glasses, the dull complexion, the simple manners of an unworldly scholar of sedentary habit, who took little bodily exercise and spent his days and nights in preparing his lectures and in legal writing., He carried into the lecture hall a placid manner, a self-controlled bear ing that characterized him throughout life. It must be con fessed that he did not possess personal magnetism, that his delivery was tiresome, and that his prose was heavy and interesting only to the eager student. But his kindliness, his earnestness, and his thoroughness went far to remedy these defects of temperament and literary style. The more earnest the student, the greater was his admiration and re spect for the preceptor. There were no false barriers between him and his pupils; together they formed a band of familiar co-workers in searching and defining the law. One Monday afternoon a class had gathered for a lecture from Professor Bigelow on some phase of the Law of Fire Insurance. The place of meeting was the hall at 36 Bromfield Street where the Methodist clergymen of the city and suburbs were wont to meet on the forenoon of that day for companionship and conference. The Bible used in a brief service had been overlooked and left on the reading-desk. Professor Bige low came in and, leaning on the Bible, said that he had come without his notes and would be unable to give the lecture. " That needn't trouble you, Professor," flashed up one of the class. " You've got under your arm the best book ever written on insurance against fire! " Needless to say consideration of the Law of Fire Insurance was post poned for that day. He continued his lectures in the School on various 1922.] MELVILLE MADISON BIGELOW. 333 branches of the Law until 1902, when he also became Dean. He held that office until 1911, in which year he retired at the age of sixty-five from active work in the general school, and devoted himself to his historical studies, and as pro fessor emeritus, to the post-graduate training of a few eager and kindred spirits who wished under his wise direction to pursue further the philosophy and history of the Common Law. The published works of Professor Bigelow may be divided into two groups, one embodying the results of his historical and philosophical studies, and the other treatises for the courts and practising lawyers, subsidiary to which were text-books and case-books for students. These lines of work he carried on coincidently and tirelessly throughout life, and will account for the enormous amount of his legal output. While still gathering material for his Placita Anglo Normannica he was with amazing industry writing his first great treatise on the Law of Estoppel or of Incontestable Rights. This work which became and remains the last word in its peculiar field, was finished by him at the age of twenty six, and was published in 1872, when beginning his career in the Law School. This book, as revised by him from time to time ran through several editions, the sixth and last issu ing from the press in 1913. In 1873 he published a List of Overruled Cases by Courts of America, England and Ireland, and in 1875 his Leading Cases in the Law of Torts. This was followed in 1878 by a text-book for students on the Law of Torts itself, and in 1895 by Cases on Torts (Stu dents' Edition). His Law of Torts ran through eight edi tions, the last coming out in 1907, while an English edition of it was published by the University of Cambridge, of which a third edition appeared in 1908. The year 1878 saw the completion of the first volume of his treatise on the Law of Fraud, the second volume of which did not appear until 1890. His Elements of the Law of Equity, a digres sion into a new field, appeared in 1879. In 1879 and 1880, Professor Bigelow's historical studies, continued since 1870, culminated in the year first named in the publication of Placita Anglo-Normannica, and in the summer of the second year in that of the History of Pro 334 MASSACHUSETTS HISTORICAL SOCIETY. [MAY, cedure m England, works which stamped him as easily the first of legal historians in America. The Placita consisted of reports of law cases from the reign of William the Con queror to that of Richard the First, and the Procedure covered the processes of the courts in England during the Norman Period, 1066 to 1204. Mr. Justice Holmes in his address on The Path of the Law, delivered at the Law School of Boston University, on January 8, 1897, gave full credit to " the part which the study of history necessarily plays in the intelligent study of the law as it is today," and went on to state that Professor Bigelow with others here and in Eng land had " made important contributions which will not be forgotten." During 1880, besides completing the historical works above noted, he found time, in spite of sufficiently engrossing duties as a teacher in the Law School, to publish a treatise on the Law of Bills, Notes and Cheques, of which a second edition was necessary in 1900, and at the same time he prepared for the press the first American edition of Odgers on Libel and Slander. After an interval, he wrote and pub lished in 1885, a book on the Mistakes of the Law, followed in 1886 by the making of the thirteenth edition of Story on Equity Jurisprudence. In 1891, he offered to the pro fession the fifth edition of Story on the United States Consti tution, and in 1893, the sixth American edition of J arman on Wills, to be followed in 1898 by a treatise of his own on the same subject under title of the Law of Wills. The years following, including his deanship, during which he combined the exacting duties of administration with those of instruction, marked a cessation in this enormous and varied amount of legal authorship. The only exception was his collaboration with Brooks Adams, Edward A. Harriman and H. S. Haines in the writing of Centralization and the Law, which came out in 1906. In 1911, upon resigning as Dean, Professor Bigelow com pleted the long list of his sound and authoritative exposi tions of the law, with the publication of his Law of Fraudu lent Conveyances. In the same year appeared A False Equation: The Problem of the Great Trust, of which he was joint author. After several years, in 1920, Papers on 1922.] MELVILLE MADISON BIGELOW. 335 Legal History of Government, brought to a close his long and useful career as a legal author. He had become the first of law writers in America in the scope, the number, the soundness, and the authority of his legal writings. Dr. Eliot in his address on " Melville M. Bigelow and the Legal Pro fession " summed up his career as follows: " I suppose his most scholarly work is the Placita Anglo-Normannica; it has given him his widest distinction as a Scholar in Europe, as well as in America. His books have a high reputation and a constant sale in more Continents than any American law publication with which I am acquainted. They are used not only in Great Britain and the United States, but in Egypt, South Africa, Australia, China and Japan. His name will live for generations in the history of legal authorship. His books have a solid value, as respects both matter and man ner, which is so firmly based that they will go down for generations in frequent use." Thenceforward to the end of his scholarly career Pro fessor Bigelow divided his thought and interest between the graduate work of the Law School, of the founders and original faculty of which he was the sole survivor, and his historical researches among the traditional and mythical beginnings of the Common Law. Mr. Justice Holmes might well have had Professor Bigelow in mind when he said in his address on " The Path of the Law," already referred to: " In very many cases, if we want to know why a rule of law has taken its particular shape, and more or less if we want to know why it exists at all, we go to tradition. We follow it into the Year Books, and perhaps beyond them to the customs of the Salian Franks, and somewhere in the past, in the German Forests, in the needs of Norman Kings, in the assumptions of a dominant class, in the absence of general ized ideas, we find out the practical motive for what now best is justified by the mere fact of its acceptance and that men are accustomed to it." Professor Bigelow, in the fifty odd years he had been associated with it, had seen the School of Law of Boston Universtity grow from a modest beginning to an influential position among the law schools of the coun try, he had also seen many of its graduates, all of whom had been grounded and stimulated in their legal studies by his 336 MASSACHUSETTS HISTORICAL SOCIETY. [MAY, sympathetic teaching, holding honorable positions as judges of courts and practitioners at the bar. Professor Bigelow, if not better known in England than in the United States, enjoyed a higher reputation, at least was accorded greater recognition, there than here. During his frequent visits to England he was honored by the fore most lawyers and judges of that country; he was taken into their homes; he was put up at the most exclusive clubs; he was invited to sit upon the bench; and in every way was made to feel the very high esteem in which they held him, great legal luminary that he was. These attentions while gratifying, were embarrassing, for as Dr. Eliot further said of him: " He was one of the most modest and retiring per sons I have ever known. It was not plesaant to him to be told how great a legal scholar and author he was. He once went to a dinner in London where all the participants were learned in the law; and they all wanted to shake hands with him, and tell him how much they enjoyed and used his books. This was a positively painful operation for Dr. Bigelow. He shrank from it ? so much so that he did not adequately convey his thanks to those who congratulated him." The Northwestern University, in whose School of Law Professor Bigelow had delivered courses of lectures, con ferred upon him in 1896, the degree of LL.D., and in 1912, Michigan University, his Alma Mater, in whose School of Law he had lectured as well as studied, bestowed upon her famous son the same degree. But Harvard University, under whose shadow he lived for fifty years, whose foster son he was, and whose scholars were familiar with the work of this international scholar, and Boston University, to which he gave its most successful graduate school, both passed him by in bestowing their highest degree. Truly a famous lawyer, no less than a prophet, is " not without honor save in his own country! " With a new found leisure toward the end of a busy life, Professor Bigelow took much satisfaction in writing verse. These verses with his usual modesty he printed for merely private circulation among his friends. He had a more vivid fancy, a greater poetic insight than ability to clothe the creations of his fancy and imagination in limpid and graceful 1922.] MELVILLE MADISON BIGELOW. 337 verse. He worked over his lyrics and sonnets painfully and conscientiously as he had worked over and corrected the prose of his essays, his lectures and his law books. The re sult was that while often filled with a sprightly fancy and a depth of poetic feeling, his stanzas were rigid in form and at times awkward in expression. His most successful efforts were in translations of Odes of Horace, where faithfulness in conveying the poet's meaning was coupled with poetic form not inappropriate to the Latin verse. Professor Bigelow was elected a member of the Massachu setts Historical Society on April 12, 1900. He served on the Council from 1907 to 1910, on the Committee to Examine the Library in 1904 and 1905, and on the Committee to Nominate Officers in 1903 and in 1912. From soon after the date of his admission until within a short time before he died, he read a number of learned papers, among them the following: June, 1902, on " Constitutional Questions, 1761-76, which led to the Declaration of Independence." November, 1911, on "Payments to Provincial Officials." April, 1916, on "The Old Jury." December, 1917, on "Medieval English Sovereignty." November, 1918, on " Becket and the Law." November, 1919. Mention of paper on " The Family in English History." In addition he made remarks at various meetings, among them the following: June, 1901. Personal Recollections of Bishop Stubbs. April, 1902, on the death of James B. Thayer. February, 1903, on his work as Editor of the Province Laws. December, 1904, on punishment for crime in Massachu setts Colony and Province. November, 1911, on primogeniture in Massachusetts. June, 1915, on presenting a piece of wood from the Magna Charta tree, cut down in 1880, given in commemoration of the 700th anniversary of the tree. He was also a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and an honorary member of the Harvard Chapter of the Phi Beta Kappa, and had belonged to the American 338 MASSACHUSETTS HISTORICAL SOCIETY. [MAY, Historical Association, the Massachusetts Society of Sons of the American Revolution and was an honorary member of the New York State Bar Association. He was a Fellow of the Society of Science, Letters and Arts, in London, as well as a member of the council, Seiden Society, London, and an associate of the Victorian Society in the English metropolis. He was a vice-president of the American Bible Society. By his first wife he had three children, two girls who died early, and a most promising son, who died while in the Harvard Law School and whose death was a sad blow to his father. His first wife died in 1881. In 1883 he married Miss Cornelia Frothingham Read who died in 1892, and in 1898, he married Miss Alice Bradford Woodman, who sur vived him. He died in Cambridge, on May 4, 1921.