SEVEN The Fourth Age: On the Origins ef War And one man in his time plays many parts, His acts begin seven ages. At first the infant, Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms; Then the whining school-boy, with his satchel And shining morning face, creeping like snail Unwilling to school. And then the lover, Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad Made to his Mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier, Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard, Jealous in honor, sudden and quick in quarrel, Seeking the bubble reputation Even in the cannon's mouth .... William Shakespeare As You Like It, Act II, Scene VII Henry David Thoreau jotted his musings in his journal: "Where a battle has been fought, you will find nothing but the bones of men and beasts; where a battle is being fought, there are hearts beating. . . . The past cannot be presented; we cannot know what we are not. But one veil hangs over past, present, and future, and it is the province of the historian to find out, not what was, but what is .... We forget that [antiquity] had any other future than our present. . . . The heavens stood over the heads of our ancestors as near as to us." 1 However fascinating the 1857 battle on the Gila may be as an exercise in historical and anthropological sleuthing, it is only when we reflect on its possible larger meanings that the exercise becomes more than parochial antiquarianism. Lessons are to be learned from knowing the particulars of 148 The Fourth Age 149 the battle, of its antecedents and of the cultures of those who were involved. We bow to Thoreau's admonition and try to fathom what was that we might better understand what is. One of the most important questions concerning war is what are its ultimate causes, its origins? Innumerable scholars of many persuasions have grappled with this problem over the centuries. Let us look briefly at some ideas on the subject expressed by those who have preceded us. THE ANTHROPOLOGY OF WARFARE Keith Otterbein, reviewing what anthropologists have had to say on the subject of warfare, feuding, armed conflict, or armed combat, notes they seldom attempt to define what they are describing. 2 He quotes Bronislaw Malinowski's definition that warfare is "an armed contest between two independent political units, by means of organized military force, in the pursuit of tribal or national policy."3 He further alludes to Margaret Mead's definition of it as "recognized conflict between two groups as grwps, in which each group puts an army (even if the army is only fifteen pygmies) into the field to fight and kill, if possible, some of the members of the army of the other group. 4 Nearly three decades later, Mead wrote: "Warfare exists if the conflict is organized and socially sanctioned, and the killing is not regarded as murder," explaining her criteria as "organization for the purpose of com- bat involving the intention to kill and the willingness to die, social sanction for this behavior, which distinguishes it from murder of members of its own group, and the agreement between the groups involved on the legitimacy of the fighting with intent to kill." 5 R. Brian Ferguson observes: "War, by any definition, is a social ac- tivity, carried out by groups of people." And beyond that, he argues, it is "organized, purposeful group action, directed against another group that may or may not be organized for similar action, involving the actual or potential application of lethal force."6 Otterbein says quite simply that warfare is "armed combat between political communities."7 Much of the anthropological literature speaks of "primitive warfare." W. W. Newcomb, Jr., writes that primitive warfare is best understood as a 150 The Fourth Age type of conflict transitional between a peaceful state of affairs and "serious, deadly, competitive strife. Societies that practice primitive war- fare cannot long sustain fighting men in the field, since they do not have the supplies. Nor are they typified by well-organized, strong, or central- ized governmental institutions, so that raising and controlling large num- bers of fighting men is difficult." 8 He goes on to assert that "true" war is associated with cultures which have reached an animal husbandry or agri- cultural technology. "In a very real sense 'true' warfare may be viewed as one of the more important social consequences of the agricultural revolution."9 Ferguson notes the "chaotic state of the field" of anthropological re- search concerning war. "If anthropologists studying war," he writes, "could agree that certain statements of causal priorities and interactions of factors were valid cross-culturally, this consensus would provide an invalu- able frame of reference for studying the particular case of modern war. Unfortunately, any such consensus remains a long way off." 10 Robert Netting would probably agree: "The factual study of primitive warfare has never had a fighting chance in anthropology." 11 He observes that field workers only rarely have had the opportunity to bestride the field of battle while hostilities were still in progress and that investigators have had a serious bias in favor of more constructive and happy aspects of social life. With so few data, students of the subject have struggled and have lost the battle against their own unstudied assumptions. They have failed to arrive at realistic hypotheses. Investigators' "explanations have often foundered on the old dichotomy of economic versus psychological causes or latent as opposed to manifest functions" of warfare. 12 ... _ Netting advises a search for the relationships between "ecologic and material variables" within any cultural system, focusing on the variables involved in people's behavior in conflict. He then advises us that whatever we assume or believe we see as students of the culture of someone else, we must somehow integrate our assumptions and observations with what the people themselves have to say about it. "The connection between what measurably is and what it means to people is the heart of the anthropologi- cal enterprise." 13 Netting's assessment of the case corresponds all too closely with what anyone is likely to find who examines the subject of warfare and the hypotheses its study has occasioned. Anthropologists, ethnohistorians, his- torians-all of us are floundering as badly as he suggests. The Fourth Age 151 Our goal is to arrive at a high level of confidence in useful generaliza- tions such as the one so assiduously sought for so long by investigators like Andrew Vayda and Marvin Harris, 14 to name but two. They have insisted that discovery of such generalizations is an urgent matter. We are as eager as they to arrive at hypotheses to bring enlightenment concerning the causes of war. The battle on the Gila has been our springboard. And whenever we have heard tribesmen speaking, however filtered through translation, we have made sure to listen, to give these voices the authority they may deserve. We have tried to see the past as it was, including the perspectives of Indians insofar as we are able to infer them. What follows is our analysis of why the Gila and Colorado Yumans made war upon each other for so long and so seriously. We try to recog- nize · the hypotheses of others whenever these seem to illuminate our somewhat fragmentary record. RAIDING VS. WARFARE Attacks by members of individual Yuman "political communities," to borrow Otterbein's term, against other peoples took two forms. One can be designated as "raiding" and the other as "warfare." We have already discussed these concepts in great detail on pp. 35-39, as they apply to the tribes under consideration. Such concepts conform generally with what has been seen among many peoples at other times and in other parts of the world. Raids were not ordinarily intended to gain territory or to increase a tribe's political im- portance in its region. 15 Raids became military engagements only should raiders be discovered and pursued by their victims. To point up the deeper difference between warfare and raiding, the latter was an enterprise of no particular complexity, calling neither upon all the people nor requiring any special ceremonies or elaborate religio- cultural preparations. War, on the other hand, engaged to some extent the feelings of all the people, and it brought into play at least some, if not all, of the figures who personified political and religious leadership. The enterprise of war was preceded, accompanied, and concluded by religious observances without which the very continuance of the warriors' lives would have been in peril. All of this preparation for an enterprise as suious as warfare is what Anthony Wallace has discussed in a preliminary 152 The Fourth Age way as "mobilization," the taking on of psychological attitudes and feel- ings as these become necessary in the particular culture. 16 The discussion which follows is concerned primarily with warfare and only incidentally with raiding. THEORIES OF THE CAUSES OF WARFARE If seen as a facet of culture, the general character of Gila-Colorado war- fare reflects many of the same patterns and outlines as have been found in many other histories of non-literate peoples. The data tend to support the ideas of W. W. Newcomb, Jr., for example, who feels that "whether or not a culture is warlike, and the way in which it conducts warfare, are . . . dependent to a large extent upon the technological development of the culture." Moreover, the role and shape of warfare in any society "are determined by the nature of other aspects of that culture and the condi- tions of its relationships with other cultures." 17 He eschews explanations for warfare based on the notion that people are "genetically predisposed to be pugnacious and warlike" or on the idea "that wars are caused by war-making forces." He also does not believe that psychological conditions of individual men cause wars." 18 " Newcomb's "culturological view" of warfare, positing as it does a direct relationship between the ability to be warlike and the stage of technological development, is also an evolutionary view. In this, he sides with Quincy Wright, whose elaborate study places primitive war as the earliest and least complex among three stages of the history of war among human societies. In Wright's analysis, it is this kind of warfare which precedes the develop- ment of urban life. It exists only before the coming of strong, obligatory central government with its administration, judicial institutions, and ac- companying hierarchy of social classes. Even at that early stage there was always a "law of war . . . group customs or behavior patterns . . . acquired through education and discipline to which each generation is subjected 19 ...." Primitive warfare, to Wright's way of thinking, showed slow develop- ment, paralleling gradual changes in other aspects of the cultures of which it was a part. Going through this long first stage of alterations, he notes that the size of fighting groups tended to increase; warrior classes tended to become specialized; and missile weapons "tended to be superseded by The Fourth Age 153 piercing and striking weapons." Discipline and morale tended to increase, "and the battle of pounce and retreat tends to give way to the battle of mass attack and maneuver." As such changes occurred, "casualties and destructiveness of war tended to become greater."20 Many of these statements apply to the role and scope of warfare among the Gila and Colorado River peoples. The known history of their hostilities up to the final battle in 1857 makes it appear likely that warfare retained its traditional role in the several native cultures as a phase of their activities that recurred only at irregular intervals, but "in well-recognized circumstances and with well-established rules and techniques. ... War was," as Wright believed it to have been for all primitive people, definitely within the mores."21 " Concerning both immediate and ultimate causes of Yuman warfare, our first consideration is for the complexity of their armed conflict. It doubtless became elaborated through time and was influenced by considerable changes in other aspects of their cultures. In viewing the functions of war as being complex, we are in general accord with those who have assumed them to represent an aggregation of customs and beliefs: "Every war is fought for more than one motive, spurious or real, appreciated or unre- alized. Every individual warrior joins ... for more than one reason. It is characteristic of successful social institutions to have a bundle of functions, as every human activity has a bundle of utilities. ... The basic function of every institution is the maintenance of the psycho-physical equilibrium of its clientele considered as individual persons 22 ...." And just as we may expect to find several probable causes for any particular war, so also the personal reactions of individuals swept into the "state of war" may be expected to differ. 23 Among the Yumans and Pimas there was almost certainly a great in- dividual difference in reactions to plans for offensive warfare and the sudden reality of attack upon one's own rancherfa. We suspect that anyone physically able to do so rallied to mutual defense, and it is known that large numbers of women, even children, fought against attackers. As for offensive warfare, it seems likely that individual subjective motivations were so varied when a battle expedition was being planned among the Maricopas, Quechans, Mohaves, or Cocopas that it is impossi- ble to account precisely for the creation of such expeditions. As far as we know, individuals of these four groups were brought into the expedition because of their identity as members of a given clan, just as was the case 154 with the Western Apache. Unlike the case of the Western Apache, however, participation was more voluntary than otherwise. That the objectives and character of regional warfare changed about 1830 offers support for some of the more recent theories concerning warfare generally. The data indicate, for example, that a serious war of Quechans against Maricopas may have been rekindled in 1832 by a massacre of Quechans who were on a raiding party, followed the next year by a major retaliatory expedition of Quechans against the Maricopas. And so on until 1857. These events fit neatly a theoretical framework proposed by Andrew Vayda. He has pointed to the usefulness of identifying stages of wars carried on among primitive peoples. He suggests finding changes in basic problems that confronted peoples from time to time--which problems in turn might indicate shifts in the nature of wars. In other words, warfare might continue in more or less the same tempo, but no longer with all the same needs, problems, and objectives. Where war was persistent and directed at territorial conquest, "such persistence need not end because of long periods without territorial conquests or because of periods during which hostilities are undertaken ... against groups living too far away for territorial conquests for them to be feasible as the result of an escalating process."24 Here Vayda is discussing the benefits of considering war as a process with "recurrent, distinguishable phases." One may be able to identify conditions conducive to escalation from "one phase to another." Vayda feels it is important to be conscious of the "duration and frequency not simply of warfare but of particular phases of war processes. 25 " What we can see in the war processes as carried on by the Gila and Colorado peoples after 1830 is that some of the people-the Cocopa and the Maricopa-faced very much the same problems as before, while as time went on another tribe, the Quechan, found itself in a progressively more difficult situation. The Mohaves, in the meantime, had no further concerns of the kinds that had engaged them before 1830. They were now fortunately situated, with no enemies close at hand, no danger of invasion of their home territory, and with lands so ample that they presumably had more than they needed for use and occupancy. Quechan difficulties stemmed from hostilities with Cocopas which became very expensive in life and goods. Neither people, however, chose to respond to the constant danger of attack by altering its rancheria style of open and widely dispersed small settlements of a few families each. The The Fourth Age 155 war here had entered a new phase at least to the extent that permanent invasion was no longer an objective. The two groups battered away at each other in occasional large expeditionary attacks, and they brought to bear those other means, stratagems of treachery and ambush, that can be prac- ticed by peoples living near each other and who are acquainted and even slightly intermarried across the warring line. As for the Quechan-Maricopa rivalry, the Maricopas did not choose, if they had a choice, to remove their villages from the exposed western position they then held. Theirs was the closest of the middle Gila villages to potential attackers from the Lower Colorado. They continued to live in a state of apprehension, their settlements open to murderous attack without warnmg. The Mohave took part in support of Quechan expeditions against Cocopas and Maricopas whenever they were invited and whenever they chose to go along. As for the Pimas, they were engaged more and more against their enemies to the north, the Apaches, with whom they continued to exchange serious and destructive raids and expeditions of war. The Pimas never sent detachments against the Quechans, but if time permitted them to bring their warriors to the field, they came to the defense of their Maricopa neighbors when the Quechan arrived to try to overrun them. We concur with Vayda26 that it is futile to attempt to discern a "speci- fiable, discrete cause or set of causes" for any given war. There is, however, however, a possibility of finding some causes and some objectives, the more likely "probable causes" for continuation of the long, drawn out, and damaging warfare in the Gila-Colorado country after 1830. These hostilities had continued beyond the time when the stakes were lands along the Lower Colorado. Many causes have been suggested for the phase of war characterized by destructive attacks between about 1830 and 1857. We will review the possibilities briefly and will point to some factors we believe may account for continuing hostilities during the period. First of all, the evidence indicates that war remained prominent in the value systems of these Yuman groups through many succeeding genera- tions. The myths and historical narratives constituting the peoples' reli- gious literature continued to speak of militant activity on the part of the progenitors-those superhuman, human, and animal personages involved directly or indirectly in the creation of the people. More than this, by the time the historical record can be regarded with some confidence, offensive warfare was clearly prestigious. It offered one of the very few arenas in which a male could establish respect among his 156 The Fourth Age own people. Taking the case of the Mohave as an example, the only other callings through which men might accumulate prestige were those of shaman ( kwathidhe); religious leader and festival chief ( kohota); and "head chief" (ya/tanack or huhach). A head chief was "one who was concerned about the welfare of all the people; who was wise and under- standing; who possessed knowledge of tribal culture, tribal history, and tribal needs; who protected tribal lands against enemies and land-grab- bers; who set a worthy example for his people; who was faithful to his trust and was honorable in his dealings; who always kept his word; who gave his time and means in working for the good of the tribe, and who could not be tempted or swerved by personal ambitions."27 Moreover, among the Mohave many of the bravest fighters [ kwanami] became chiefs."28 " Anthropologist C. Daryll Forde, who gathered information from Quechans in 1928 and 1929, was, as we have noted earlier, led to observe, "War expeditions are the one feature of their practical life which are considered worthy of remembrance and attention."29 However, five of his seven informants were men, and it is likely the worthiness of remem- brance of war expeditions reflects this bias. As with Mohaves, the war leader or kwanami, "brave man" was an important and prestigious individual among Quechans. The religious leader and "head chief" of the Mohaves may have been combined in one status among Quechans, the kwoxot, "a tribal leader, an authority to whom appeal might be made on any matter of dispute, but more sig- nificant as an embodiment of spiritual power than as a lawgiver or execu- tive."30 Quechans also had shamans, called "doctors" by Forde, who could simultaneously be singers, funeral orators, or chiefs. 31 One modern investigator notes that "Spanish and Anglo sources consis- tently reported the existence of two tribal leadership statuses [among the Quechan], one [ kwoxot] for civil affairs, the other [k wanami] for war. Forde's account accepts this dichotomy, but how accurately it reflects the traditional Quechan situation-as distinct from one imposed by foreigners accustomed to executive hierarchies-is not clear."32 There is no question that the status of career warrior was a prestigious one among Yumans of the Lower Colorado, especially in the early and middle nineteenth century. This seems confirmed by historical and ethno- graphic data as well as by the fact that the warrior mystique among the Mohaves long outlasted the end of hostilities and was still present in the early decades of the twentieth century. 33 That warfare was a pervasive theme in the lives of Lower Colorado The Fourth Age 157 Yumans can be seen in scalp dances and pre-expeditionary ceremonies; in postwar victory celebrations and purification rites ( described on pp. 90- 92, 100); and in the commemorative Mourning Ceremony and all its stately grandeur. These were among the very few activities bringing together all the people of a tribe, and with those ceremonies came the public exercise of ritual by a tribcl. most prestigious figures. The Mourning Ceremony was held in honor of any outstanding warrior. Other such ritual occasions of general importance were apparently nonexistent among Mohaves, although both Quechans and Cocopas celebrated harvest ceremonies and Quechans had a special celebration at the time of the mesquite harvest. 34 The only organized training for boys and young men was that which introduced them and hardened them to usages of war. This simultaneously underlined the importance of the mature, skillful, and brave men who served as teachers. There was also a purely practical reason for continuing the program of training boys to fight and of selecting from among them those who promised to become career warriors. Every small settlement of people in Quechan and Cocopa lands, the disconnected southern Mohave settlements, and the Maricopa villages lay open to surprise attack. Any person and any piece of property could fall prey to raiders, and there had to be warriors in each locality who could take up arms. The same was true for Pimas. These activities are but the visible evidence of a phenomenon which probably possessed deeper meaning. Offensive warfare and brave resis- tance in defense of one's people must have been upheld by a deep belief in the significance of these acts of affirmation, these ultimate acts of patriotic identity. Ethnologists became aware of such sentiments when talking both with older men who had survived the tribal wars as well as with somewhat younger men, and even women, who had never seen the battles and who had never suffered a surprise attack. William Kelly encountered this emo- tion when talking with the Cocopa; Leslie Spier, among the Halchidhoma, Mohave, and Maricopa; A. L. Kroeber, among the Mohave; Edward Gifford when talking with a number of these peoples; and C. Daryl! Forde when studying the culture of the Quechans. It was Forde, writing about the Quechans, who perhaps best described what might be called this sense of patriotism: Tribal pride played a great part in the continuance of hostilities: every attack had to be repaid by a counterattack. This code was externalized and strengthened by the custom of scalping. ... Every scalp lost had to be avenged. There is now perhaps no means of 158 The Fourth Age knowing how deep-seated was the scalping ritual among the Yuma but the acquisition of scalps is almost invariably adduced by the teller of war stories as one of the primary objectives of war parties and the procedure is still well known among the older men. 35 Success in the numerous small skirmishes that constituted warfare in this region was indispensable to welfare. It was the concrete expres- sion of spiritual strength. To be severely beaten by an enemy or to draw back sluggishly and avoid attackers would bring down scorn and shame, for Yuma mysticism was essentially directed at the acqui- sition and manifestation of great "power," power which should make them invincible before their enemies. ... The explanation of this continual fighting is to be sought in the deeply rooted tradition of warfare as a means of obtaining and demonstrating tribal strength. This tradition is associated with a defi- nite technique of fighting, with particular criteria of bravery, and the use of feathered standards, symbols of bravery and invincibility analogous to those of the Plains [tribes] . Above all, warfare enters intimately into the creation myth and its reenactment in ritual. While it would be impossible to prove that the mythological and ritual correlates are earlier than the practice of habitual fighting among these people, the two would appear to be associated in origin .... The condition of the Lower Colorado, then, would appear to con- form to the postulates of Perry that primitive warfare, in the sense of organized violent behavior, is an institution, not an innate tendency, a product of human culture depending everywhere for its existence and perpetuation on a definite code of belief and practice more stable and significant than any one of the series of military activities in which it is manifested; in other words, that a warlike society must of necessity maintain a permanent tradition and apparatus without which its practices will fall into decay. 36 Such an understanding of the basis for continuing war by the Quechans is dose to George Fathauer's conclusions from long experience with the Mohaves. In the course of mentioning many causes he felt were in various ways related to tribal warfare, he also discussed what he took to be the central relationship: The typical response of Mohave informants attempting to convey an The Fourth Age 159 understanding of almost any aspect of their culture was to narrate the parts of the origin myth pertaining to the subject of inquiry, and war was no exception. Warfare was instituted by Mastaxmo, who decreed that certain people in each generation would experience power- dreams connected with it. For the Mohave, then, warfare was a constant, inevitable part of their total way of life. ... The origin myth was an expression of the basic philosophical premises of Mohave culture. It embodied the fatalistic belief that all behavior was determined by the patterns established by the creators. All power was received by dreaming, and it was the identical power which had been given by Mastaxmo in the beginning. This resulted in a static conception of the universe. In each generation certain individuals automatically occupied the statuses which made up the social system, but the system itself remained unchanged. All of the important tribal officials were sacred specialists in the sense that they derived their power directly from the creators by means of unsought dream experiences. . . . The reason for the obsessive desire for war on the part of the braves was religion, embodied in myth and per- petuated by unsought power-dreams. They had dreamed war power, and therefore it was their nature to want war. It also explains why they constantly were able to keep the tribe embroiled in war although some of the people may have been peacefully inclined. According to Mohave philosophy the specialists who dreamed power were tribal representatives of Mastaxmo in their generation. The people were dependent upon them to play the roles decreed by the creator 37 .... We stress Forde's and Fathauer's opinions because it seems to us that the conscious or nearly conscious motivations for Yuman battle expeditions must have been grounded in certain aspects of the value system of each culture. By "value system" we refer to the series of assumptions these people learned in childhood concerning what the world is, what it should be, and how one's life and one's existence with others is supposed to unfold. This is also to assume that personalities in those Indian societies were shaped according to the outlines and directions given in the tribal value system. How the various individuals in any one of those societies would put into his own words the importance of offensive warfare is something we cannot now recover. Nor can we see the full range of individual decisions that could be made within bounds set by values that bore on all individuals. 160 The Fourth Age Basic assumptions about life and proper conduct must have been vir- tually unchallengeable in the conservative and repetitive round of life of those tribal societies. Rather than questioning the values themselves, peo- ple followed their personal decisions whether to act or not to act within the limits allowed. We wish we knew more concerning allowable personal alternatives and more of the cultural contexts in which people were given opportunities to decide their own courses of action. By the time ethnolo- gists visited these people after the turn of the twentieth century, they found few enough surviving warriors from whom they might have learned about the realm of personal choice open to men and women even under stress of the "state of war." What made up a warrior's mind to volunteer for battle or not to take part? What did the women think of warfare, and what range of opinions were to be seen in their decisions to urge their husbands to go to battle or to avoid it? How would a wife or daughter remember the anxious days of waiting for the warrior's return? Would she be eager to see him go yet another time? In our records there are only a few specific examples of widely variant choices being made by religious and moral leaders, by warriors, and by others. One chooses to leave the battleground; others argue bitterly as to whether an expedition is indicated, or is prohibited, by omens and prospects of other kinds. There is enough evidence to suggest that the enterprise of war as such was unchallengeable by any of the people, at least as late as the mid-nineteenth century, but that societal sanction of war obligated no specific person to take part. Yuman history indicates that expeditions were infrequent; they occurred with no perceivable regularity; and no one was ever forced-beyond infor- mal pressure exerted by peers--to accompany any expedition. Perhaps the voluntarist nature of offensive warfare helps explain its long endurance as an important part of the culture of each of these peoples. Their political organization had not shifted to the point at which orders were given and obeyed in matters of life and death. To return to the assumption that war remained central to these cultures, we are impressed by that view and therefore are inclined to accept the deep conviction to be seen in Daryll Forde's statements and in those of George Fathauer, even though these are based on suggestive information rather than on clear proo£ The fact is that the battle expeditions were from beginning to end surrounded and penetrated by the most elaborate ritual The Fourth Age 161 in the hands of the tribes' most prestigious figures. Moreover, the enter- prises were carried through time after time despite the strong likelihood of defeat and of tragic loss of men. The battle expedition was an austere undertaking, and to all appearances it had a quality that reenforced values embedded in the culture. 38 After years of study of the ethnology and known history of some of these aboriginal peoples, A. L. Kroeber offered an integrated answer to the problem of warfare, one which he found in tribal size, agriculture, and the sense of identity of the warriors: These peoples had a sense of set-offness. The Mohaves felt them- selves to be different. The Yuma in the same way felt themselves to be distinctive. Other tribes were hostile to both of these but their attitude remained essentially the same. Such attitudes led to political and military lineups that ended in an indulgence of warfare which finally squeezed all but the Yumas and Mohaves off the Colorado River. They fought not for redress or maintenance of their independence but because the ambitious and brave among them looked upon war as the road to honor and prestige. This is atypical for California as a whole where the overwhelming majority of Indians looked upon warfare as a trouble, and something to be avoided if possible. There seems little doubt that the much larger size of tribes in the lower Colorado area, their subsistence by farming and the military attitude, are all connected. 39 THE DRIVES TOWARD WAR We move for a moment beyond the example of Yumans and Pimans to more abstract considerations. Keith Otterbein and R. Brian Ferguson have possibly done the best jobs to date in summarizing theoretical approaches of anthropologists, as well as of others, toward causes of war. Otterbein groups these causes under eight broad categories:40 I. Innate aggression. Some investigators point to an instinct of pugnacity and aggression as an explanation for fighting between groups of men. Among the more noteworthy of such proponents have been Konrad Lorenz41 and Robert Ardrey. 42 The most outspoken critic of their views has been Ashley Montagu, whose volume on The Nature of Human Aggression 162 The Fr1Urth Age was written primarily to "examine in detail the facts and arguments, and in the end to refute the conclusions, presented to an enormous public in recent years by a group of popular writers who state that human beings are inescapably killers--that because of their animal heritage, they are genet- ically and instinctively aggressive, and cannot be otherwise." Montagu argues that "our true inheritance lies in our ability to make and shape ourselves, not the creatures but the creators of our destiny."43 Montagu and other critics of the innate aggression idea say the idea is both a simplistic and tautological one; that fighting between two men is not warfare; and that there is no physiological evidence that man has an aggressive instinct. 2. Frustration-aggression. Proponents of this view assert that frustrations of everyday life create an aggressiveness that is often expressed ultimately in warfare. This is not to say that frustration causes war; it is merely to assert that the more frustrated a people become the more likely they are to go to war. As Otterbein points out, at least three anthropologists and one psychologist have advanced this notion. 44 3. Diffusion. A few anthropologists regard warfare as an invention of Homo sapiens, and see it as being peculiar to that animal. If war is regarded as an invention, it becomes an idea capable of being diffused from group to group just as one might, for example, learn the art of agriculture from a neighboring tribe. 4. Physical environment. As Otterbein notes, "Few anthropologists ar- gue that the physical environment or a culture's mode of adaptation to its environment is responsible for warfare, 45 although Geoffrey Corer saw a correlation between war and subsistence technology. 46 Related to this notion, however, is the concern with the ecological ap- proach. "In the broad sense, ecology deals with the relationship of men and other animals to each other and to the physical environment. For those anthropologists who subscribe to this approach, an equitable distribution of resources is viewed as ecologically desirable. 4 7 . .." 5. Goals of War. Many theorists believe men engage in warfare to achieve goals, many of these growing out of the culture itself In our case, for example, Fathauer48 argues that Mohaves were inspired to go to war to satisfy magico-religious beliefs. And Otterbein49 lists as common goals subjugation and tribute, land, plunder, trophies and honors, defense, and revenge. The Fourth Age 163 6. Social structure. Social structure factors involved in causes of war have been encompassed within fraternal interest group theory. Some analysts point to localized aggregates of related males who can resort to aggressive measures when the interests of their members are threatened. Margaret Mead50 has even argued that "war can be abated if nations can develop social structures in which units resembling fraternal interest groups are absent." 51 7. Military preparedness. "Military readiness can itself be considered a cause of war. That is to say, if a culture is well prepared militarily, it is more likely to become involved in wars than if it were not so well pre- pared." 52 Before he made this observation, Otterbein carried out a cross- cultural study for which he devised a scale of military sophistication comprised of eleven efficient military practices. His survey led him to the conclusion "that political communities with efficient military organiza- tions are likely to engage in frequent warfare with culturally different political communities." 5 3 8. Cultural evolution. Many students of warfare have called to our attention that the type of war fought by a people relates to the evolutionary stage in their development as a culture. Elman Service, for example, sees warfare waged in different ways and for different reasons among bands, tribes, chiefdoms, states, and empires. 54 One of Service's statements, that hunter-gatherers are relatively peace- ful, has been challenged in print by Carol Ember whose comparative survey of fifty such societies has led Ember to assert that some sixty-four percent of them engaged in warfare at least once every two years, twenty- six percent had warfare somewhat less often, and a mere ten percent could be characterized as truly "peaceful." Even eliminating from the sample hunter-gatherers who were horseback hunters and those who depended on fishing for more than half their subsistence, Ember still found that warfare was rare among only twelve percent of the remaining groups. 5 5 One of the problems with this criticism is that Ember does not make a distinction, as indeed the data base on which the survey rests does not always clearly distinguish, between formal warfare and raiding or raids that become elevated into major skirmishes. Many ethnographic mono- graphs fail to make such a differentiation, and yet such a differentiation is possibly crucial to our knowledge of war's origins. There are important qualitative, as well as quantitative, differences. 164 The Fourth Age R. Brian Ferguson has more recently provided us with an excellent survey of anthropological perspectives concerning war. 56 He arranges the studies into five principal categories, those involving (1) human aggressive- ness and war; (2) psychological approaches to war; (3) social structure and war; ( 4) political organization and war; and (5) military organization and war. He then constructs what he sees as an over-arching or integrative category, "a materialist view [that] is not necessarily opposed to other approaches to war."57 This "materialist approach to war focuses on war's relation to the practical problems of maintaining life and living standards. Since about 1960, this usually has meant studying war in relation to local ecology. But ecology is not everything 58 ..." He argues that both the natural environment and internal sociocultural arrangements need be taken into account, that changes in either or both can produce stress among individuals which they might attempt to alleviate through force. Ferguson also has a discussion of motivations" for war, 59 " an aspect of the phenomenon which we regard as immediate causes or rationalizations rather than ultimate origins of war. The classification schemes of Otterbein and Ferguson, presented here in an extremely cursory manner, are assuredly not the only ones concerned with theories of war causation. Bernice Carroll and Clifton Fink have devised what they call a "two-dimensional matrix for analyzing theories of war causation," in which one axis concerns itself with whether the analysis is at the level of the international, supra-national, or nation-state system; at that of the coalition, nation-state, or group subsystem; or at that of the individual actor. The second axis outlines theories of strict determinism; limited causality; gross predictability; indeterminacy; limited free will; and the absurd universe. In their scheme, for example, analysis occurring at the level of the subsystem has produced notions of limited causality labeled "factor theories," such as biological, environmental, psychological, sexual, structural, social-psychological, and economic factors. 60 Simon Ottenberg, much more simply, classifies anthropological studies of war into three groups: social, cross-cultural, and intracultural. 61 Anyone working through the plethora of published materials concern- ing warfare and its causes is a candidate for despair. The proposals, and even attempts to classify proposals, have been so numerous and so dispar- ate as to make one feel the subject lies beyond human comprehension. Our contention is that there exists a single factor common to all warfare which in some way may help explain its existence in human affairs. The Fourth Age 165 TO BE MALE AND TO BE HUMAN We are concerned here with the origins of war, that is, of what Otterbein called "armed combat between political communities," rather than with intragroup or interpersonal conflict or aggression. And by "origins," as stated in Chapter 6, we mean ultimate, primary sources or causes rather than immediate causes. Too, we stand with those who view warfare as a cultural institution and we choose to seek its sources within the confines of traditional, learned behavior. Having said this, we pose the question: what is the common denomina- tor in warfare? One answer: the conduct of war is quintessentially a male occupation. It can be argued that females are also warriors, as witness the roles of women in warfare in the twentieth century, including women in combat roles. There is no question, however, that the role of warrior is universally one primarily linked to men and that women as actual fighters are very much the exception-however much this may presently be changing. Even the Amazons were not "women." Third century B.C. Athenians bestowed on Amazons the ''male prerogatives of ruling lands, enslaving neighbors, and pursuing a reputation," thus giving Amazons male attributes even as they retain their female bodies. "The result," says classics scholar William Tyrrell, "is a sexual hybrid. Amazons are not women in male armor but are androgynes-apparitions composed of male and female elements which confuse the distinctions between the sexes and the values and catego- ries of thought assigned to each."62 In other words, there was no question in Greek minds about the masculine role in pursuits of war. Once having gotten beyond the definition of war itself, there is probably no other fact concerning it that is so apparent. It is so obvious, indeed, that it has been all but overlooked in the literature. We simply take for granted that males are the principal planners and executors of war. Rarely have we asked why. The answers may be many. We do not believe, however, it is because of the physical superiority of males over females. Brute strength may have advantages in some kinds and in some stages of warfare, but in areas of physical endurance, potential skills in handling weapons, and in mental quickness and alertness, the curves of frequency occurrence for males and females probably overlap near their apexes. Neither do we believe the warrior role is a result of some instinctual perverseness in the character of 166 The Fourth Age males which inclines them to acts of violence, although we are aware that maies---even as children-are more aggressive in ail societies in which the phenomenon has been studied and that individual aggressive tendencies are related to levels of sex hormones. 63 But it is a large step from what may be biologically innate leanings toward individual aggression to ritualized, socially sanctioned, institutionalized group warfare. We are instead persuaded by the evidence that the reason men are the chief proponents of warfare as well as the warriors is to be discovered in the nature and evolution of culture. A few theorists have walked to the very threshold of this simple, yet powerful, idea, but have failed to take the next step. Lynne lglitzin, for example, has noted that "it has been men who have fought in wars, men who have committed the great majority of violent crimes, and men who have made up the political elite whose decisions involved the use of violent force in domestic and foreign confrontations."64 She also observes the equating of militarism and violence with manliness, but she neglects to speculate on how or why such a link has come to pass in the unfolding of human history. So does she fail to emphasize the fact that the majority of "masculine traits" and "feminine traits" are cultural constructs rather than biological givens. But she concludes with the hope, one which we share, that "someday men and women will assert not their respective masculinity and femininity but their common humanity."65 In 1971, Bernard Fontana taught a course in historical archaeology at the University of Arizona. On the first day of class, eleven numbered artifacts, whole or fragmentary pieces of ordinary objects collected from the surface of an abandoned late nineteenth-century southern Arizona mining camp, were circulated to all sixty-six students. Each object was numbered and students were instructed to describe the objects in no more than one or two sentences. Among the artifacts was a .22 caliber metallic cartridge case. The base was stamped with the letter "U," indicating it had been manufactured by the Union Metallic Cartridge Company of Bridgeport, Connecticut. A small rectangular indentation at one edge of its base indicated it was a rim- fire cartridge and that it had been fired; the casing was bent where some- one or something had stepped or fallen on it after it had been ejected from the weapon in which it had been fired. Of the sixty-six students, twenty-two were female and forty-four were male. Their descriptions of this artifact were highly revealing. Males in The F()Urth Age 167 the class were inclined to write in detail: "cartridge case, rimfire, about .32 caliber, brass, with U. S. stamped on;" "an old bullet casing of a rim- fired bullet, apparently made for or used by the U. S. Govt. Size between .22 and .30-.30;" or ".32 cal. rim-fired cartridge casing marked U. S.; copper or brass (from pistol)." The women's accounts, in contrast, tended to be brief: "bullet shell;" "empty shell cartridge (gun);" "metal sheH to a gun (small);" or "an old bent cartridge." A careful tally indicated that half the males as opposed to thirty-five percent of the females noted "rimfire;" some forty-eight percent of the males as contrasted to twenty-seven percent of the females guessed at the caliber; seven males and one female guessed whether the weapon firing the cartridge had been a rifle or handgun; and sixty-one percent of males and only thirty-six percent of the females paid some written attention to the "U" stamped on the base. Without belaboring the point, it is obvious, and not at all surprising, that this artifact was of far more interest to males than to females in the class. Males focused on more attributes to include in their descriptions; they were more knowledgeable about the object. Metallic cartridges, as representatives of the entire realm of firearms and, by extension, of weapons, are dearly within the cultural domain of hunting and fighting. And hunting and fighting are clearly within the traditional realm of male activities. It is a cultural legacy that is untold thousands of years old. Students writing about the cartridge were the unconscious bearers of that tradition. In 1932, Father Berard Haile, a Franciscan priest on the Navajo Reser- vation, wrote down a text dictated by Curly To Aheedliinii of Chinle, Arizona. It was a small part of the Emergence story of the Navajos, and Father Berard labelled its topics "Where People Moved Opposite" and Where People Moved Opposite Each Other."66 " Subsequently, in 1981, Karl Luckert, a student of comparative religions, published the edited and annotated text collected by Father Berard as Women 1⁄4?rsus Men: A Conflict of Navajo Emergence. 67 This story tells of a time in the Navajos' mythic past when the sexes became separated. This occurred when they were still in the underworld before emerging to the surface of the earth in their present form. A conflict had caused all the men to go on one side of a stream, leaving all the women on the opposite bank. Eventually, the difficulties were re- solved and the women went across the stream to rejoin the men. Luckert's 168 The Fourth Age interpretation of these events is that they are really speaking of the time Navajos shifted from a hunting-gathering economy to one supplemented, if not supplanted, by agriculture. He writes: ...T he men's role and importance in the human economy has been called into question [in this myth]. Although the problem of having to adapt to a settled planter's lifestyle has caught up with some Navajo men only in relatively recent times--and with their primary adaptation to herding they never needed to face up to this problem in its full extent-a brief glance at the early dynamics of plant domesti- cation might nevertheless be helpful. . . . The earliest planting procedures were naturally in the hands of women. Originally, perhaps, the women's success with their campsite gardens resulted in a gradual increase of the human population. In turn, this increase put pressure on the supply of food animals. An increase in the number of hungry people, and a relative decrease of available game animals, together threatened the status of men. Worldwide, this threat has produced secret men's associations which artificially tried to maintain the old glory and comradeship which formerly existed during hunting expeditions 68 .... . . . The division of the life processes into hunting (i.e., the wielding of death power) and nurture (i.e., the wielding of life power) was a natural one. . . . Perhaps very early already, in prehistory, the men had to keep their death power away from the camp of the family. That is, they had to keep it out there on the range and in the same context of the wider cosmos, by ceremonial methods. Feminine life power, on the other hand, has nurtured the family along at the home camp. This basic separation of death and life functions probably is what has evolved into the distinct roles of men and women today. It took at least three million years to get us to the level of problems at which we now are. 69 . . . [The fall of First Man in this Navajo myth] means the end of masculine identity. Very probably, it was the decline of their hunter economy which drove the men into forming unions and secret societies. With home life and planting in the hands of the women, what else was there for them to do? After over a million years of dignity through hunting, of having been providers as hunters, now suddenly depending on the women's economy, masculine dignity could only be salvaged by developing more inclusive ceremonialism in a cosmos-wide dimension .... This editor lc onfesses] that in his household, too, a woman rules over the necessities of daily living, The Fourth Age 169 whereas he, reading the evening newspaper, judges matters of world- wide and cosmic dimensions. What will a disinherited hunter do if his woman was to claim equality also in this holdout of face-saving pretense? Mothers give birth and raise children into adults. Apart from fleeting moments of passionate surrender in procreation, what is there left for men to do which women could not do as well? What is there, in line of fully understood and controlled creativity, by which a man can establish his exclusive male identity? ... The after- effects of having had to quit a very ancient way of life are still upon us.70 It appears to us that Luckert has seized on an important idea. But we would suggest that rather than emphasizing the resultant formation of male" unions and secret men's societies, one might point to the domestica- tion 9f plants and animals-the Neolithic Revolution-as a principal gen- erator of warfare as a cultural institution. Before that time, males, as hunters and as gatherers who worked the distant perimeters of their group's territory, were essential partners in the maintenance of family and community life. Everyone needed the food men provided in order to survive. Indeed, in a comparative survey of 161 hunter-gatherer societies carried out by Carol Ember, in eighty-three percent ( 134 cases) of such societies men contributed more than the women to primary subsistence; in nine per cent ( 14 cases) the contribution was about equal between men and women; and in only the remaining eight per cent ( 13 cases) did the women contribute more than the men. By omitting the 30 equestrian societies from the sample, the percentages remained basically the same. And fur- ther reducing the sample to 77 societies by eliminating those highly depen- dent on fishing, Ember found that men continued to be the major contributors to subsistence in seventy percent ( 54) of the cases; males and females shared the work evenly seventeen percent (13 cases) of the time; and women outdistanced men in thirteen percent ( 10) of the societies in the sample. 71 With the advent of farming, however, it became evident that women often could perform most or even all essential community chores: tend the hearth, bear and raise children, and plant, cultivate, and harvest the calories needed to stay alive. The worth of males, their dignity as human beings, was challenged to the utmost. A major response appears to have been a shift from man the hunter (and killer) to man the warrior (and killer); from man the physically strong hunter and gatherer working the 170 The Fourth Age distant boundaries of one's own territory to man the statesman and world diplomat. The new statuses may well be what Luckert has called "face- saving pretense." There seems to be plentiful archaeological evidence for a tremendous upsurge in warfare--or at least armed conflict, whether raiding or war- fare--in Europe in late Neolithic times. 72 Notwithstanding, lrenaus Eibl- Eibesfeldt has said, "The theory that war first developed in the Neolithic age with the development of horticulture and agriculture does not stand up to critical examination; there is evidence of armed clashes as early as the Paleolithic period."7 3 This statement does not distinguish, however-and, indeed, it may forever be impossible to do so on the basis of archaeological evidence alone-among violence resulting from raiding, institutionalized warfare, or other possible forms of conflict that might result in an "armed clash." Similarly, Phil Donahue has noted that "in the Saltadora cave in Cas- tile, Spain, there's a crude painting of a man that dates from the Meso- lithic era. He has been shot with an arrow. He drops to the ground, clutching his own bow as he goes down: the first recorded victim of our own species' thirst for its own blood."74 But it is a large step from what may well be an instance of individual aggression to socially sanctioned, or- ganized warfare. For that matter, the Saltadora cave figure may be history's first recorded hunting accident, a tragedy rather than a thirst for blood. While many cultural evolutionists have noticed the correspondence be- tween warfare and agricultural societies, virtually all of them have attrib- uted the correlation to resultant population increases and the need for more territory for people and agricultural pursuits. While acknowledging that land suited to agriculture is a comparatively scarce commodity, we suggest that hunters and gatherers-fishermen aside-require more land for their subsistence than do farmers. If this is so, and additional pressures for land are not the origin of institutionalized conflict, what are the sources of the correlation? It may also be that the Neolithic Revolution resulted in agricultural products that became an additional motive for raiding by members of non- agricultural societies. Raiding brings with it the risk of being killed; killing, as we have seen, can be the occasion for vengeance warfare. Once begun, vengeance warfare can continue in a prolonged cycle. While something like this may indeed have occurred in antiquity, we believe that a deeper reason-and one that might help explain the persis- The Fourth Age 171 tence of warfare as a modern phenomenon-may lie in the disequilibrium in the sex divisions of respected societal roles which resulted when males became less essential as hunters and gatherers. Most "causes" that have been proposed for warfare, we suggest, are perhaps better regarded as rationales. Plunder, land, slaves, revenge, political or economic dominion over others: these may be the ex post facto formulations of males who are members of societies that give legal sanc- tion to the killing of "enemies." Should this be so, they are better classi- fied as manifest motives than as latent causes. If, indeed, it was the introduction of agriculture that led ultimately to the institutionalization of warfare, how might we account for such warfare among groups for whom agriculture, or even horticulture, meant very little in terms of their subsistence? The most dramatic example of such societies in North Amercia is to be found among the Plains Indians. 7 5 Here we can only guess that it was another aspect of the Neolithic Revolution-the domestication of animals---that may lie at the root of the kinds of formal hostilities characteristic of Plains groups in historic times. It is impossible to speak with any degree of confidence concerning the nature of gender roles in Plains societies in the prehistoric period, and by the time Europeans began to describe these peoples in more than a passing manner, the introduction of the Old World horse among them had already brought about revolutionary changes. Says anthropologist Bernard Mishkin, "The pastoralization of Plains culture affected the whole gamut of social relations and particularly warfare and rank," and that these were the effects of overnight changes."76 " What those changes may have been with respect to the worth of males' roles in society can only be conjectured. What we can say is that horse-ridden warfare and raiding among buffalo- hunting Plains Indians evolved to look suspiciously similar to these same institutions as we have found them among the foot-soldier, crop-growing Yumans. Among the Kiowa, for example, warfare and raiding were separately conceptualized, the former being a revenge party of one hundred to two hundred men and the latter being carried out to get horses or to gain personal glory by from one to thirty men. 77 Nonagricultural hunter-gathers highly dependent on fishing, such North American groups as the Aleut, Yurok, and Bellacoola, were less than peaceful in their relations with their neighbors. 78 Here, however, as in the case of many agricultural societies, the women could make large contributions to the group's subsistence without having to rely on men. 172 The hmrtl, Age It may be that what we are looking at is some kind of energy equation. In prehistoric times, buffalo provided the chief source of food for Plains peoples, even for such horticulturalists as the Arikara, Pawnee, Osage, and Omaha. Killing buffalos must have been fairly costly in terms of human energy, especially that of the males who were most likely the hunters. The horse altered the energy equation: the horse, rather than men, did most of the work and the whole process was speeded up such that in a relatively short time more than enough meat, hides, sinew, and so forth, could be acquired to supply not only immediate needs but to provide a surplus as well. This means that men afoot, who had plenty of meaningful work to do, as men on horseback found themselves with an overabundance of leisure time and, conceivably as well, in a threatened status position vis-a- v1s women. Whatever the explanation, it is clear that equestrian hunter-gatherers, if the results of Ember's survey of such societies has produced valid results, are far more likely to be "warlike" than otherwise. A table listing thirty- one hunting-gathering societies in terms of their "warfare frequency" includes equestrian societies only among those who carry out "warfare" more than once every two years. None are shown among those for whom warfare is less frequent" or from absent to rare. 79 " Moreover, the lure of energy efficiency provided by the horse in buffalo hunting was apparently enough to entice such settled horticultural village peoples as the Arikara, Pawnee, Osage, and Omaha largely to forsake that life-style in favor of horse-raiding and increased buffalo hunting. The Cheyenne and Arapaho, believed to have been maize farmers in the protohistoric period, gave themselves over entirely to horse nomadism and hunting. 80 On the other side of the coin, societies characterized by their peaceful nature may be those in which men and women contribute more or less equally to the maintenance of the whole, that is, in which men and women equally produce, collect, or conserve the energy needed for the society's survival. David Fabbro, drawing on Morton Fried, 81 notes that most peaceful societies are egalitarian band societies, those which "generally lack formal patterns of ranking and stratification, place no restriction on the number of people capable of exercising power or occupying positions of prestige, and have economies where exchange is based on generalised reciprocity."82 The examples cited by Fabbro83 are the Semai of Malaya, 84 a people who rely at least in part on slash-and-burn agriculture; the Siriono of eastern Bolivia, 85 also hunter/gatherers who practice a small amount of The Fourth Age 173 slash-and-burn farming; the Mbuti pygmies of the lturi Forest;86 the Kung Bushmen of the Kalahari Desert; 87 the Copper Eskimo of northern Canada;88 the Hutterites of North America, 89 a people who maintain themselves by agriculture, both for subsistence and cash; and the fishing/ farming islanders of Tristan da Cunha. 90 The data from our Lower Colorado and middle Gila Yumans and Pimans appear to support the hypothesis that warfare has its origins in an imbalance in the sex division of valued status positions within a society. Yumans on the Colorado were warlike, we suggest, because they lived in one of the best agricultural regions of the entire Southwest. The Colorado and Gila rarely failed; floodplain farmers could almost always count on a crop, especially after Spaniards introduced winter wheat. Women could do all the work necessary for society's physical survival. Males were poten- tially persons of great leisure. Or, put another way, males were potentially all but useless. Given these circumstances, it is small wonder that they developed warfare to a high degree. It was a way they could maintain their dignity as human beings. Jack Forbes, writing about the Quechans, noted: "They were basically happy with their way of life, even including the intertribal warfare which provided the people with the opportunity for demonstrating and enhanc- ing their spiritual power and the individual with the opportunity for demonstrating and developing his manhood 91 . . ." He is, of course, talking about males. On the other hand, warfare for the Pimas was basically of a defensive nature. To be a man who had killed another in battle, and therefore to be a "ripe" person, was indeed to have a valued status. But the dangers atten- dant on this activity were great, and there is nothing in the literature to suggest that Pima warriors were necessarily among the most respected of human beings. The ethnographic data available incline us to believe Pimas had worked out a mutually satisfactory adjustment in the role of sexes in their society, one which did not involve a particularly prestigious warrior status for males. Hunting (all but non-existent among Yumans), "keeping the smoke," practicing shamanism, helping to gather wild foods, clearing fields, planting, cultivating, constructing weirs, digging ditches for irriga- tion, and managing the water distribution system were apparently status positions sufficient to assure males of their humanity. While harvesting farmed products was normally the province of females, the harvesting of wheat-introduced by the Spaniards-was chiefly the work of men. 92 174 The FfJUrth Age We are not suggesting that warfare is a necessary result of agriculture. Fabbro's list of peaceful societies attests to this. Other male statuses than that of "warrior" might adequately substitute for those of hunter and far- wandering gatherer in sedentary societies. Indeed, it is less likely that "agriculture'' is the key concept than "sex division of labor," "sex divi- sions of valued status positions," or "sex division of energy allocation." Whatever the forces may be causing severe maladaptation in this relation- ship, be they farming, animal husbandry, equestrian nomadism, intensive fishing, or other economic activities, it is the imbalance in the relationship that matters. All of us, males and females, need to awaken each morning believing we are worthwhile persons who have real and respected purposes for living. Whether we are right or wrong that war has been brought about by forces unleashed through the domestication of plants and animals, the subsequent need for males to re-validate their status as dignified human beings, and a natural shift from hunting to fighting, it is certain the question is one worthy of closer examination by all who would know the origins of war. The sex division of labor; male and female status positions within a society; facts concerning the involvement of males and females in the production, allocation, and consumption of energy on which societies and individuals depend for survival: these, we suspect, are the clues to ultimate understanding. We should like to think that when all of us comprehend the roots of warfare, and by extension, the modern tree which continues to thrive on those roots, we might be set free from its taint, including the threat of universal annihilation. We can imagine a world of societies in which warrior status is denigrated out of existence rather than respected into maintenance and growth. We should like to think that we, our progeny, and generations to come will sense the freedom from fear and anxiety fostered by a lasting peace. Ahwan-tsevarih, a Maricopa leader, said it well at a Mohave-Maricopa peace conference in the late 1850s or early 1860s: In the mornings, a coyote would howl and scare you: 'It is the Mohave, war is coming' you thought, and you seized your bows a_nd clubs; now that is over. Some days, an owl would hoot in the morn- ing-'look out, war is here,' you would say. Now there is no more fighting. Let coyote yelp; you can sleep. When we still fought, we all got up early, we were afraid to sleep late. Now we can sleep after the sun is up 93 ....