Newsfeatures
Institute to Support Soil
Contamination Research
The creation of a new institute is bringing
researchers from Ohio State University
together with experts at other academic, government,
and industrial institutions to find
ways of dealing with soil contamination from
the ground up.
The National Science Foundation is providing
Ohio State University with $5.8 mil-
lion over five years to fund an Environmental
Molecular Sciences Institute (EMSI). This
is the fourth such institute created by the National
Science Foundation. Three others were
established in 1998 at Columbia University,
Northwestern University, and Princeton University.
"About half of the institute’s research ac-
tivities will involve issues of contaminants in
soil, both from industrial and organic contaminants,"
says Samuel Traina, a professor of
natural resources at the university and codirector
of the institute. "The most emphasis
will be on natural organic matter in soils."
Decaying plant and animal material and
peat moss and manure added to soils ultimately
turn into soil organic matter. Ac-
cording to Patrick Hatcher, professor of
chemistry at Ohio State University and codirecter
of EMSI, complex assemblages of
molecules of organic matter called humic
substances are able to envelop contaminants
and trap them for years.
Hatcher says researchers want to understand
whether such contaminants remain
trapped--and harmless--forever, or if they
could one day escape and harm the environment.
"Think of an assemblage of humic sub-
stances as having a shell that is very strong,
but if you hammer on it long enough, you can
crack it and release what’s inside."
Research at EMSI will also focus on a
group of potential soil-contaminating chemicals
called polycyclic aromatic hydrocar-
bons (PAHs), Traina says. These chemicals
are believed to be carcinogens and can be released
during the incomplete burning of coal,
oil and gas, garbage, or other organic substances.
They can be man-made or occur
naturally. Sources of PAHs include dyes,
plastics, pesticides, vehicle exhausts, asphalt
roads, wildfires, agricultural burning, and
hazardous waste sites.
"We need to understand how these contaminants
occur and how they interact with
organic matter," Traina says. "Does the material
pose a hazard, and if it does, what can
be done about it?"
Aiding the researchers in these determinations
will be new, more sensitive instru-
ments that will allow researchers to study
contaminants at lower levels that are more
representative of the contamination at a number
of sites, he says.
"In the past, we had to mix up samples of
pollutants with concentrations so high that
you would never see them anywhere---except
maybe in the worst Superfund site you
could find. That doesn’t tell you a lot about
how a pollutant could affect the environment
in more realistic concentrations."
Hatcher agrees.
"No one has been able to delve into these
issues on a molecular level because the tools
just haven’t been available," he says. "Before,
we had to stop at the test tube. Now we
can look deeper."
The soil isn’t the only place where EMSI
researchers will be looking for contaminants.
They will also focus on those in the atmosphere
and water.
"With today’s technology, we’ll learn a
lot about specific pollutants, but we’ll also
learn more about soil, water, air--all the systems
in which pollutants interact," Traina
says.
One of the goals of EMSI is to give students
an opportunity to learn also. EMSI fac-
ulty will join with K-12 teachers to give
talks and demonstrations about environmental
issues to improve the scientific liter-
acy of students and encourage more young
people to pursue careers in environmental
science, Traina says.
Other educational and outreach programs
involve creating a web site, holding symposia
on a yearly basis to coincide with Earth
Day, and promoting graduate and undergraduate
research opportunities.
For more information, contact Patrick
Hatcher at 614-688-8799 or Samuel Traina
at 614-292-9037.
Virtual Chemistry
Taking in all of the spectacular films,
shows, hands-on interactive exhibits, and
laboratory workshops of European museums
and science centers without leaving the
comforts of your home may seem virtually
impossible, but a new web site will take you
there in a virtual flash.
The Chemistry for Life Virtual Gallery
web site (www.chemforlife.org.) collects, 
a virtual flash-animated environment, all of
the new exhibits, workshops, films, and
shows from the CHEMistry for Life Project.
Launched in 1997, the project was a collaboration
between a consortium of 16 major
European science centers and museums and
the European chemical industry.
Today, these science centers and museums
have developed 30 prototype exhibits,
which are designed to stimulate interest and
give the general public, especially younger
people, a better understanding and appreciation
of the importance of chemistry in
everyday life.
Learning from Light!
A million solar roofs, 90,000 watts of
electricity, and a top 10 ranking are all part
of a plan designed to help people in Ohio and
throughout the count~ learn from light.
The Learning from Light! program of
American Electric Power (AEP), a multinational
energy company based in Columbus,
OH, recently helped the state reach an installed
capacity ofg0,000 watts of solar-gen-
erated electricity. The Buckeye State is approaching
a top I0 ranking in the U.S. De-
partment of Energy’s (DOE) Million Solar
Roofs Initiative.
"Ohio does not come to mind when you
consider solar energy," says John Hollback,
AEP manager of environmental affairs in
Ohio. "However, communities and schools
across the state have embraced the Learning
from Light! initiative, and momentum is
building."
AEP’s Learning from Light! program
promotes solar power projects anywhere in
the world and offers advice to communities
on how to take a system from concept to finished
product. Local energy providers, gov-
ernment agencies, and environmental organizations
can become partners.
"The program teaches local communities
about the feasibility, reliability, and eco-
nomics of solar electricity and other ways to
generate electricity," says Glen Kizer, president
of the Foundation for Environmental
Education and AEP’s major partner in Learning
from Light!
A major component of Leaming from
Light! is aimed at educating students about
solar energy and energy management in general.
"This system is an invaluable learning
resource for the school and the community,"
J. Nat. Resour. Life Sci. Educ., VoL 30, 2001 ̄  127
 Hollback says. "It’s a springboard to understanding
renewable energy and energy man-
agement and usage. Students, teachers and
the public can go to AEP’s Learning from
Light! web site to see how much solar power
is contributing to a school’s electrical needs.
They can determine how many solar panels,
for example, it would take to keep the school
running."
Students at Wheelersburg Elementary
School in southern Ohio learned this first
hand. They raised money from businesses
and individuals to pay for a solar panel system
and its connection to the school’s elec-
trical system.
"Everyone in Wheelersburg worked together
to bring solar power to their school,"
Kizer says. "More and more schools are finding
out about our program and want to j o in."
In addition to AEP, sponsors of the
school’s solar project included the Ohio Department
of Development’s Office of En-
ergy Efficiency, which provides funding to
all such projects, and the DOE’s Million
Solar Roofs Initiative. The goal of this initiative
is to have one million solar roof sys-
tems installed on U.S. buildings by 2010.
For more information, visit the Learning
from Light! web site at www.aep.com/environomental/solar.
America’s Largest Classroom
on Agriculture
The creation of a new program gives students
the opportunity to learn about agricul-
ture in America’s largest classroom.
America’s Largest Classroom on Agriculture
is a nationally coordinated campaign
that envisions school children around the
country taking time during National Ag
Week to learn a lesson about agriculture. The
campaign was organized by the Agriculture
Council of America (ACA), a nonprofit organization
composed of leaders in the agri-
cultural, food, and fiber community.
America’s Largest Classroom on Agriculture
focuses the efforts of the ACA and
leaders of the agricultural community on
providing teaching materials to educate future
generations of consumers about agri-
culture. Together, the agricultural commumty
engages thousands of volunteers and organizations
to assist in the education of students
about the role agriculture plays in our lives.
America’s Largest Classroom on Agriculture
uses existing curriculum provided by
Project Food, Land, and People (FLP) that 
pilot tested with students and teachers. The
program also works with existing agricultural
groups to distribute educational mate-
rials; these include Ag in the Classroom, National
FFA organizations, FLP, and 4-H.
For more information, or to receive a National
Ag Day educational kit or poster,
please contact ACA by phone 1-888-98AGDAY;
fax 913-491-6502; email info@
agday.org; or visit the web site at www.
agday.org.
Conserving Coral Reefs
through Tropical Cultivation
Each year, more than 90 million tropical
ornamental fish are purchsed around the
world. The $100 million aquarium market is
big business, but it can cause big problems
for the world’s coral reefs and the thousands
of plant and animal species that live in them.
Cyanide or explosives are often used to
capture tropical fish, but these techniques
can destroy coral reefs, rich ecosystems that
are the breeding grounds for many economically
important fish. Many feel that coral
reefs are just as important o the world’s food
supply as the rich farmlands of the American
Midwest.
New research is underway at the University
of Texas-Austin Marine Science Insti-
tute (UTMSI) to develop techniques for
breeding tropical fish in captivity. If successful,
it would reduce the number of trop-
ical fish that are captured in the wild, and
thus help protect the world’s coral reefs.
"The culture of ornamental fish and
shrimp would help safeguard coral reefs and
provide a new source of animals for the
aquarium trade as an alternative to wild capture,"
says Dr. Joan Holt, a senior research
scientist at UTMSI who will head the research.
"Coral reefs are suffering worldwide
from coral bleaching, sedimentation, and
pollution from shoreline development.
Losses from these causes are very serious.
The harvest of food fish and aquarium fish
adds fin-ther damage to coral reefs."
In addition to providing critical habitat,
coral reefs also protect coastal areas from
erosion and storm damage and are important
to the tourism and travel industries. A recent
study has suggested that more than 25% of
the world’s coral reefs have already been
lost to global warming, pollution, and fishing
activities.
Currently only freshwater fish are successfully
bred in captivity, according to Matt
Palmtag, a graduate research assistant at the
University of Texas-Austin, who will work
with Holt on the project.
"With freshwater aquatic fish, reproduction
in captivity is a successful industry that
has been going on for decades," Palmtag
says. "The technology and techniques just
haven’t been there for marine fish. They’re
mostly caught out of the wild at this point."
Once successful techniques for breeding
tropical fish in captivity are developed, they
will be introduced to fish collectors around
the world.
For more information, contact Dr. Joan
Holt by phone at 361-749-6716 or by email
at joan@utmsi.utexas.edu. Colorful tropical
fish images are available by calling Marsha
Miller at 512-471-3151 or by visiting
www.utexas.edu/admin/opa/news/00newsreleases/nr
200012/fish2.html.
Celebrate Arbor Day
with a New Guidebook
A new guidebook can help you plan the
perfect Arbor Day celebration. Celebrate
Arbor Day Guidebook is available free to
help with ideas and examples. The revised,
24-page booklet is especially helpful to
teachers and community leaders. It includes
a history of Arbor Day, a planning calendar,
poems and quotes suitable for presentations,
a sample proclamation, information on selecting
and planting trees, and more.
For a free copy, order online at arborday.org/publications.html
or write to: Cele-
brate Arbor Day Guidebook, P.O. Box
85784, Lincoln, NE 68501-5784.
High School Science
A new program at Comell University will
give high school students the opportunity to
engage in authentic environmental research
about issues of interest in their own communities.
The program, Environmental Inquiry, has
brought high school teachers to campus during
each of the past few summers to work
with Cornell scientists and educators. These
teachers have learned university level re128
̄  J. Nat. Resour. Life ScL Educ., VoL 30, 2001
 search protocols and then adapted them to
make them safe and feasible for use by high
school students.
Environmental Inquiry curriculum development
currently focuses on four topics:
1. Bioremediation and waste management--using
microorganisms and
compost to decompose wastes and enhance
soils and aquatic environments.
2. Environmental toxicology--using
bioassays and chemical assays to assess
environmental health and make
judgments about acceptable levels of
risk.
3. Ecology of non-native species--monitoring
populations of rare and inva-
sive species and determining their impacts
on plant and animal communi-
ties and nutrient cycling.
4. Watershed dynamics--using aerial
photographs, maps, and stream measurements
to assess land use practices
and their impacts on riparian habitats
and water resource quality.
Activities within each of the four topics
engage students in three progressive levels of
inquiry, modeled after the research activities
that scientists normally conduct. As a
supplement to the written curricula, Environmental
Inquiry includes an interactive
web site where students and teachers can
download information, post questions or
messages about their research, and participate
in anonymous peer review of each
other’s research reports.
For further information, visit the web site
at http://ei.cornell,edu or contact Nancy
Trautmann at Envlnquiry@comell.edu.
Phytochemicals Fight Disease
The next time that you bite into an apple
or munch on a carrot, just think of the fact
that you’re probably ingesting about 100 different
chemicals. Don’t worry though, these
naturally occurring compounds, called phytochemicals,
are good for you. Phytochemi-
cals are found in fruits, vegetables, beans,
and grains. They’re vital for the health of
plants, and now, the National Cancer Institute
is working with scientists on discovering
how and why they’re good for us.
The bright colors, flavors, and aromas of
fruits and vegetables come from phytochemicals.
Although they have no nutritive
value, phytochemicals have been shown to
prevent diseases such as cancer, decrease
cholesterol levels, enhance immune response,
and decrease blood clotting. In fact,
they’ve been shown to be helpful in the prevention
and treatment of at least four of the
leading causes of death in the USA~ancer,
diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and hypertension.
Scientists have discovered more than 900
phytochemicals already, but much is unknown
of their benefits and properties. It’s
also unclear as to the amount hat needs to be
consumed to reap the benefits. This is because
everyone’s body is different--indi-
vidual metabolism, current health, and stress
impact how phytochemicals are used. However,
the National Cancer Institute recom-
mends at least five servings of fruits and
vegetables a day.
Check Out These Waste
Management Web Sites
Cornell Composting
This site (www.cfe.cornell.edu/compost/Composting_hornepage.html)
from
Comell University includes detailed information
about the science and engineering of
composting as well as case studies, resources
for teachers and students, and even a popular
section on weird and unusual composting.
The site recently won a StudyWeb Excellence
Award and was cited as one of the best
educational resources on the Internet.
Trash Goes to School
This site (www.cfe.cornell.edu/wmi/
TrashGoesToSchool/TrashIntro.html), developed
by Cornell Waste Management In-
stitute, contains more than 60 solid waste
management activities that were selected by
educators from many national curricula. The
exercises, covering recycling, composting,
incineration, landfilling, and the environment,
are broken into four grade levels (K-3,
4-6, 7-8, and 9-12). They can be used to
teach diverse skills, from language and science
to art and political science, and can be
tailored to fit local needs and circumstances.
How Do Fish Survive
in the winter?
Fish are amazing creatures. They breathe
air from the water through special breathing
mechanisms called gills. These gills keep
them alive-in warm weather and even in winter,
when top layers of their pond may freeze.
Most ponds don’t freeze deep enough to
harm the fish. Aquatic (water) plants, especially
microscopic ones, continue produc-
ing oxygen as long as light can penetrate the
ice. Sometimes, however, the plants can’t
produce oxygen. Why? Because deep snow
may be covering the ice and that prevents
sunlight from shining into the water. If this
snow cover lasts long enough, the plants will
begin to die. Oxygen is used in the decomposition
process---oxygen that’s important
for the fish to survive. If enough oxygen is
used by the plants as they decay, the fish
could suffocate.
If you have a pond that is covered with
several inches of snow, you may want to
take steps to ensure next summer’s fishing
season is successful.
It’s important to remove snow from at
least one-tenth of the pond surface. This will
allow
light to reach the plants. And if the plants survive
the winter, so will the fish!
For more information, contact Jennifer
Kiko, phone 330-202-3503. (Taken from
Ohio State Univ. Ext. Bull. 374-99.)
Attract Urban Wildlife
Urbanites can attract desirable wildlife
to their property. It just takes the right plants
and habitat, said Amanda Rodewald, Ohio
State University extension wildlife specialist.
Songbirds, hummingbirds, butterflies,
and perhaps even turtles from a nearby pond
or stream could make their home in an urban
yard, Rodewald said.
"An urban flower garden targeting native
flower species can attract butterflies and
J. Nat. Resour. Life Sci. Educ., VoL 30, 2001 ̄  129
 hummingbirds," Rodewald said. "And fruiting
plants can bring in birds such as cedar
waxwings or gray catbirds, particularly during
migration."
Fruiting plants that could be planted inelude
dogwood, blackberry, and wild grapes.
Planting little thickets and shrubs also would
attract birds, she said. Some flowers that attract
wildlife are sunflowers, daisies, gold-
enrods, and black-eyed Susans.
Other wildlife-friendly things people can
do in their backyards include reducing the
amount of lawn, providing a water source,
creating meandering habitat edges, and leaving
wild or natural comers of the garden or
yard, Rodewald said.
For more information, contact Amanda
Rodewald at phone 614-247-6099, rodewald.
1 @osu.edu.
Snakes Fake Dangerous
Colors
Snakes faking dangerous colors to protect
themselves from predators can successfully
get away with this strategy, but only in areas
where truly deadly snakes are found, according
to researchers at the University of
Texas at Austin and the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill. The research adds
new weight to the evidence for natural selection.
The report on the attempts of harmless
serpents to survive by mimicking deadly varieties
has been published in the March 15
issue of Nature.
The researchers focused on predator behavior
toward extremely poisonous coral
snakes, famous for their ringed markings of
red-black-yellow or red-black-white, along
with their harmless imitators, the kingsnakes
(if red and yellow rings are next to each
other, it’s a coral snake; if not, it’s a king
snake). The theory of Batesian mimicry
holds that edible species that look like dangerous
species will be protected, because
predators evolve to avoid dangerous
species--even without previous, real life,
bad dining experiences.
The researchers predicted that the protective
effect of looking like a coral snake
would break down in areas where the genuinely
poisonous coral snakes were absent.
Under those circumstances, the process of
natural selection would not operate to eliminate
heedless predators. There would be no
need for color-conscious predators to evolve.
To measure predator attacks, the researchers
constructed fake snakes and mea-
sured the number of attacks by carnivores in
40 different locations. The sites included
areas where coral snakes were known to
occur and where they were known to be absent.
The researchers found that, as predicted,
the number of attacks on the ringed replicas
gradually increased with increasing altitude
or more northerly location--that’s because as
you move north coral snakes become increasingly
rare. The attacks increased in
areas with few or no coral snakes, because
predators had not evolved to recognize the
pattems.
Researchers said the results do not fully
explain why color mimicry continues to be
found in areas without coral snakes, but they
said their study indeed provides experimental
evidence to support the prediction that the
success or failure of Batesian mimicry depends
on the abundance of the creature being
imitated.
For more information, contact Dr. Karin
S. Pfennig at phone 919-962-6958 or Caroline
Ladhani at the University of Texas Col-
lege of Natural Sciences at phone 512-2321075
(for images, see: www.utexas.edu/
admin/opa/news/0 lnewsreleases/nr_200103
/coral2.html; verified 9 Apr. 2001).
~ SalivaryLabrum Duct
Duc, Food~ / Mandible
ltypopb~ry~
Cross Section of Mosquito Proboscis
Learn How Mosquitoes Bite
Seldom do you find a textbook with the
correct explanation of how mosquitoes feed
and correct descriptions of their mouthparts.
The Kansas Biology Teacher published a diagram
showing that "mosquitoes are not fly-
ing hypodermic needles."
Since the advent of AIDS in 1981, it is
important that students are taught the facts.
The incorrect and generalized illustrations of
mosquito feeding apparatus (found in most
textbooks) is a serious error that can lead
bright students to ownership of wrong conclusions.
It is tree that some insects transfer infec-
tion by superficial, mechanical action. For instance,
the soppy sponge-like feeding appa-
ratus of a house fly can transfer bacteria to a
sandwich.
However, unlike humans, the mosquito
does not mix food and saliva. The salivary
ducts are separate from the feeding tube.
Mosquitoes have a distinct two-pipeline system.
A larger food canal carries blood up-
ward into the insect’s digestive system. To
prevent coagulation, a completely separate
and smaller salivary duct carries saliva with
anticoagulant out to the wound. For a disease
agent to effectively utilize the mosquito as a
vector, the agent must be able to pass across
two membranes--across the digestive tract
lining into the hemocoel and from the hemocoel
across into the salivary ducts. The
malaria plasmodium and other mosquitoborne
disease agents are specialized to ac-
complish this. The HIV virus apparently cannot,
a fact also supported by epidemiologi-
cal data.
This was taken in part, with permission,
from Kansas Biology Teacher (Vol. 9, No. 2,
Nov. 2000), Box 4050, Emporia State University,
Emporia, KS 66801-5087.
Create Your Own
Terrarium Necklace
Grade-school scientists learn that creativity
is the key when setting out to explore
the natural world.
The Wisconsin Fast Plants Program is an
educational and outreach effort that provides
instructional materials and training for teachers.
The program’s name refers to plants
whose fast life cycle makes them ideal for
classroom experiments. Fast Plants is a labor
of love for Dr. Paul Williams, an emeritus
professor of plant pathology at the University
of Wisconsin, Madison, who has retired only
on paper.
Recently, Williams encouraged area third
graders to get creative with their hands and
minds. He showed them how to use everyday
throwaways to craft science projects. Wearable
science was the recent theme. Each stu-
dent left that day with botanical jewels-necklaces
hung with plastic tubes bearing
growing mosses, liverworts, or other botanical
specimens. Other neckwear included
magnifying lenses encased in film canisters
and spherical terrariums made from small,
plastic drink bottles.
"They get their own personalized pet
plants," Williams says. "Kids really take
ownership of the projects when they take
them home hanging around their necks."
For more on the Fast Plants Program,
visit http://www.fastplants.org.
This was taken in part, with permission,
from the CALS Quarterly (Vol. 18, No. 4,
Winter 2001), Department of Life Sciences
Communication, 440 Henry Mall, Madison,
WI 53706.
130 ̄  J. Nat. Resour. Life ScL Educ., VoL 30, 2001
 Digging for Dirt
on Earthworms
Ever wondered why there are no native
Canadian earthworms? It turns out the last
Ice Age wiped out any native species in
Canada. Also of interest is that the sightless
and ear-less earthworms avoid hungry birds
by sensing the vibrations of the birds on the
surface. And, earthworms can freeze solid
and still live, as long as the freeze occurs
slowly.
While the feats and fortitude of earthworms
may seem trivial to some people, they
are serious business in farming. Eileen Kladivko
is a soil physicist in Purdue’s Depart-
ment of Agronomy. Kladivko became interested
in earthworms in the early 1980s after
seeing the benefits such annelids had on soil
tilth and friability. She receives several calls
each year from farmers asking about the benefits
of earthworms in agriculture.
Hard-Working Worms. Earthworms are
sometimes called nature’s plow due to their
ability to tunnel through the soil.
Shallow-dwelling species--redworms,
greyworms, fishworms, among others---create
shallow, random burrows near the soil
surface, burrowing about 3 feet per week.
Nightcrawlers dig vertical burrows that can
reach 6 feet or more into the soil. Field populations
can run as high as half-a-million
earthworms per acre, tunneling 250 miles
each week, says Dennis Linden, soil scientist
with USDA’s Agricultural Research Ser-
vice in St. Paul, MN.
The shallow tunnels create space for air
and water in the soil, while the vertical burrows
improve drainage and water infiltra-
tion.
Earthworms also eat organic matter and
plant residue in the soil, excreting it in more
usable forms. Their excrement is rich in
phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium,
iron, and sulfur; they also convert min-
eralized forms of nitrogen, phosphorus, and
potassium into more soluble, readily available
forms for plant uptake.
As they feed on crop residues, worms
distribute nutrients and humus through the
soil profile and mix organic and inorganic
soil components, says Kladivko. That’s why
soils with active worm populations tend to
exhibit greater moisture-holding capacity,
better soil structure, and more stable pH.
In his research, Linden is looking at yet
another benefit that annelids provide: carbon
sequestration. By taking organic matter underground,
the worms keep carbon fi-om re-
leasing into the atmosphere, where it would
bind with oxygen to form carbon dioxide.
Worm Preservation. With all of that free
labor, it pays to give earthworms a boost.
Here are some pointers from the experts: (i)
leave plenty of surface residue; (ii) reduce
tillage; (iii) apply ample fertilizer, especially
manures and sewage sludges; and (iv) and
choose your soil insecticide carefully.
Planting Worms? The agronomic benefits
earthworms deliver beg the question of
whether growers should seed their fields with
earthworms. Kladivko says the answer is
usually no.
"It’s not something that I can as yet recommend,"
she says. "I tried it in 14 different
fields. It worked in a couple of fields and didn’t
work in others. The cost is maybe a cou-
ple of hundred dollars an acre and is a onetime
thing, so I might consider it if I had a
field that should have nightcrawlers but
doesn’t."
She says most inquiries come from no-till
and low-till farmers. "I think that’s the result
of two things. One is that when growers
switch to no-till, they’re aware that they
should see more earthworms. And if they
don’t, they call me," she says. "The second
is that when they switch to no-till or minimum
tillage, they become more interested in
soil tilth and how earthworms can help."
Rather than seeding fields with nightcrawlers,
Kladivko recommends that grow-
ers work to provide the conditions under
which nightcrawlers flourish. Those include
leaving plenty of residue aboveground, reducing
tillage, and rotating occasionally into
legumes like soybean or alfalfa.
If you do choose to seed your fields, you
should do it only with nightcrawlers, says
Kladivko. "Shallow-dwelling worms will be
there already if the conditions are right. And
if the conditions aren’t right, nothing you
can do will keep those worms there."
Rounding Up Nightcrawlers. To seed
your fields, you’ll need to harvest some
nightcrawlers. The worms are active in late
spring and late fall; they can be found aboveground
after heavy rains. Recruit some
neighborhood kids to help you. Then seed
them in waterways or directly into fields
with plenty of residue. Mark those areas carefully.
Then come back periodically over the
next year or two and look for the distinctive
mounds of earth that nightcrawlers build.
Such practices are common i a few areas
of the world, says Kladivko. Most notably,
New Zealand farmers transplant sod from
worm-rich pasture into other pasture, which
is especially conducive to earthworms because
it is not tilled.
For more information on earthworms,
call your county extension office, or contact
Dr. Dennis Linden at email dlinden@soils.
unm.edu, or Dr. Eileen Kladivko at email
kladivko@purdue.edu.
Earthworm Trivia
1. In a recent experiment on a farm in California,
soil with worm castings in-
creased tomato production by 10%, and
soil with both worms and castings produced
33% more tomatoes than soil with
no amendments.
2. Studies at the School of Agriculture in
Switzerland’s Ebenrain-Sissach revealed
that worm castings bad seven
times as much available nitrogen as the
surrounding soil, and an average of 2 to
4.5 times as much available potassium.
3. The life expectancy of earthworms is
generally 4 to 8 years.
4. Earthworms are an excellent source of
nutritional protein, comparing favorably
to dried soya meal and fish meal. Such
a food product would be prohibitively
expensive to produce. Fortunately.
5. Earthworm burrows increase water infiltration,
and earthworms also increase
moisture- holding capacity by increasing
water-stable aggregates in the soil. Some
burrows have been found to travel as
deep as 50 inches below the soil surface.
6. Earthworms are active in the spring and
fall; during the summer and winter, they
escape extreme temperatures by burrowing
deeply or by entering resting
states, which are similar to hibernation.
7. Pyrethroids, such as Force insecticide,
are harmless to earthworms under field
conditions.
8. An acre of well-fertilized, low-lying
pasture can support one million worms.
Many no-till crop fields are home to
half-a-million worms per acre.
9. No, earthworms do not come to the surface
after heavy rains to avoid drowning.
The surface water and high relative humidity
keeps them from dehydrating,
and being aboveground makes it easier
for them to mate and migrate.
10. To encourage earthworm populations,
experts recommend that growers reduce
tillage, leave plenty of surface residue,
and apply ample fertilizer.
Top Ten List for Farming
"Ten Things Kids Want to Know About
Farming" is a new video produced by the
American Farm Bureau Foundation for Agriculture
to help teachers answer questions
about agriculture. Targeted for grades 4 to 6,
viewers are taken on field trips to farm and
ranch locations nationwide, offering a firsthand
view of what happens to produce the
food and clothing be use everyday.
J. Nat. Resour. Life ScL Educ., VoL 30, 2001 ̄  131
 State Ag in the Classroom (AITC) coordinators
were asked to help develop ques-
tions that students frequently ask farmers.
Agricultural producers provided answers
during onsite taped interviews.
Comments about the video include: "I
think it was outstanding for rural classrooms
as well as city classrooms. It gave a broad
overview of farming and farm life, and what
each entails. This will certainly be a tool that
we will use in our AITC program."
The 22-minute tape is available for
$18.50, $15.00 or 2 or more. To order, call
847-685- 8663, fax 847-685-8626, or email
marys@fb.org. A supplemental Teachers
Guide is also under development.
Discover Science Fair Projects
Finding the perfect science fair project
can take a lot of time. Here is a web site that
can help you find individual or group projects.
You can find ideas to get you started in
agriculture, chemistry, botany, zoology, environmental
science, and more. The site also
helps you learn what a science project is,
parts of a science project, the research question,
the hypothesis, the procedure, the re-
sults, and the conclusion.
Check out details and ideas at
http://www.usda.gov/is/kids/fair/story.htm
(verified 9 Apr. 2001).
Great Lakes Web Sites
A great wealth of educational resources
are available to nearly everyone at the click
of a button. The following are several Great
Lakes-related web sites that offer information
for students, teachers, and anyone in-
terested in our natural resources (all verified
16 Apr. 2001).
¯ Great Lakes Information Network
www.great-lakes.net
¯ Great Lakes Commission
www.glc.org
¯ Great Lakes Fisheries Commission
www.glfc.org
¯ Compendium of Great Lakes Web Sites
http://huron.lre.usace.army.mil/
levels/Update 141 .pdf
WSSA Undergraduate
Research Award--Year 2002
The Weed Science Society of America
has developed an Undergraduate Student Research
Grant designed to encourage and in-
volve exceptional undergraduates in agricultural
research. Interested faculty mem-
bers are encouraged to identify potential
award candidates and discuss the possibility
of sponsoring a research project. Awards
may be used as a stipend, for research budget
expenses (travel, supplies, etc.), to defer
fees, to defray living expenses for summer
research, or any combination of these items.
Award. Up to $1000 for support of undergraduate
research to be conducted over a
minimum of one quarter/semester during
2002. This award may be used to defray the
cost of research supplies or as a stipend. Support
of a faculty sponsor is required. Awards
will be made to the student, to be administered
by the faculty sponsor’s department.
Applicant. The applicant is an undergraduate
student with a strong interest in
Weed Science. Students majoring in all related
disciplines may apply.
To Apply. Applicants should prepare a 23
page research proposal including name,
address, phone number, title, objective, experimental
approach, discussion, budget and
references. The discussion section of the proposal
should describe the expected results
and their possible significance to weed science.
The student should provide a cover
letter in which general academic and career
goals are discussed. A copy of the student’s
academic transcripts should also be provided.
Faculty Sponsor. Any faculty member
who is actively engaged in weed science research
is qualified to be a sponsor. The fac-
ulty sponsor should review the research proposal
with special attention to the budget, the
distribution of funds should be approved by
both the student and sponsor. In addition,
the sponsor should provide a letter of reference
including a statement of his/her will-
ingness to supervise the proposed research
and to provide needed space, equipment and
supplies above those requested in the proposal.
The sponsor is encouraged to assist the
student in presenting his/her results at a regional
weed science meeting.
How to Apply. The completed proposal,
academic transcripts, cover letter, and faculty
letter of support should be forwarded to: Dr.
John Jachetta, Dow AgroSciences, 9330
Zionsville Road, Indianapolis, IN 462681054;
phone: 317-337-4686, fax 317-337-
4649, email jjjachetta@dowagro.com. Proposals
should be received no later than 15
Nov. 2001. Funding decisions will be made
by 25 Jan. 2002 and presented at the 2002
WSSA National Meeting Awards Banquet.
Interactive Site Attacks
Insects from Cyberspace
The folks at FMC Corporation are the
first to admit that there are a lot of bugs in
their new interactive site. In fact, they are
proud of each and every one of them--the
loopers and weevils, the aphids and grubs,
even the worms.
FMC’s new interactive site, www.spiderweb.fmc.com,
lists more than 60 kinds of
crop- munching insects, served up to help
growers identify the culprits that are infesting
their fields. The site enables growers and
crop consultants to search by kind of crop or
name of insect, or if they prefer, make a visual
ID from a "bug zoo," an interactive,
360-degree view of insects. There is a forum
for chatting online with fellow crop consultants
and growers about what is bugging
them, a Virtual Insect Library, and infestation
maps.
For more information, contact Jonathan
Eastwood at phone 804-698-8279,
jonathan.eastwood@martinagency.com.
Read More about Farming
You might want to read about farming,
but what writers and books should you look
for at the library?
According to the Ohio State University
extension, some good choices of authors are"
Louis Bromfield, Wendell Berry, Gene Logsdon,
and David Kline. Throw in folks like
Henry David Thoreau, Aldo Leopold, Rachel
Carson, and James Herriot, and you have
got yourself some very wise teachers.
Reading their books might be a challenge.
Or it might not be. It depends on the book and
your reading level. You might try starting
with Kline’s Great Possessions. It can be
read and enjoyed by people of all ages. The
same can be said for Herriot’s books, like All
Creatures Great and Small.
From there, consider Logsdon’s Living at
Nature "s Pace, Thoreau’s Walden, Leopold’s
A Sand County Almanac, or any of Berry’s
wonderful books. They are worth a try no
matter how well you read. These writers
speak of the challenges, joy, and fun of farming.
Taken, in part, from the Ohio State Uni-
versity News re/ease for the week of 8 July
2001, Kurt Knebusch, phone 330-263-3776,
knebusch. 1 @osu.edu.
132 ̄  J. Nat. Resour. Life ScL Educ., VoL 30, 2001
 New NIST Website:
No One over 18 Admitted!
A new National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) website gives 4th 
8th grade students a fun way to learn about
measurements, science, and technology.
Found at http://www.nist.gov/kids, the new
site lets children explore the research and
programs through a variety of educational
games and activities.
Among the activities available for kids
are riddles, a hidden pictures page, a scrambled
word puzzle, a crossword puzzle on
measurement, and a metric pyramid that can
be downloaded, cut out, and assembled.
Also available from NIST is a printed
brochure that features many of the same activities
found on the kid’s website. To obtain
copies, email your request with a mailing
address to inquiries@nist.gov, or phone 301975-NIST
(6478). For more information,
contact Michael E. Newman, phone 301975-3025,
michael.newman@nist.gov.
Website Celebrates Children
A brand-new section of the Ducks Unlimited
website is designed just for kids. The
Greenwing area (http://www.ducks.org/puddler/greenwings/home3.htm)
gives kids 
chance to participate in games and contests.
Sections include Ask Dr. Bob, Fun and
Games, Activities, and Facts. Teachers will
want to check out the educational materials
found on the site.
More Useful Websites
Biointeractive. The Howard Hughes
Medical Institute provides a virtual lab at
Biointeractive for high school students. Students
can enter a cardiology lab, bacterial ID
lab, or a neurophysiology lab. Each lab consists
of accurate graphics, a notebook, glos-
sary, and an online quiz (http://www.biointeractive.org/grants/lectures/biointeractive/).
Who Wants to Win $1,000,000? This is
a science and math quiz game that resembles
the popular TV show. There are questions
based on physics, chemistry, astronomy, biology,
and geometry (http://education.jlab.
org/million/index.html).
Live At The Park. Live at the Park is a
site for grades 1(-8. Students can take a virtual
field trip to America’s greatest national
parks, monuments, and museums, which are
presented with animations, videos, virtual
reality, and live webcasts. Free, ready-to-use
online lessons, word puzzles, assignments,
and objective tests are provided to teachers
containing the covered material including:
natural science, geology, history, paleontology,
music, art, and much more
(http://www.liveatthepark.com).
Fun Science Gallery. Fun Science
Gallery is a site for inexpensive, simple science
experiments for the beginning scientist.
Here you will find instructions showing you
how to build scientific equipment from relatively
cheap materials. Projects include in-
structions for making telescopes, microscopes,
batteries, and several other instru-
ments (http://www. funsci.com).
The Last Word. The Last Word is a site
full of everyday science questions and answers.
Topics such as plants, animals, liq-
uids, numbers, planet earth, seaside, your
body, and more are covered at this site
(http://www.last-word.com/lastword0.
This is taken in part from Lab Notes and
Math Musings, Spring 2001, Science and
Mathematics Education Center, Box 4075,
1200 Commercial St., Emporia State University,
Emporia, 1(S 66801-5087.
J. Nat. Resour. Life Sci. Educ., VoL 30, 2001 ̄  133
