Asian Perspective 44 (2020), 163–170  
© 2020 Institute for Far Eastern Studies, Kyungnam University
BOOK REVIEW ESSAY
Ars longa, vita brevis
Walter C. Clemens, Jr.
Stephen Little and Virginia Moon, eds., Beyond the Line. The Art of 
Korean Writing. Los Angeles: Los Angeles County Museum of 
Art and New York: Prestel, 2019.
John Henry Rice and Jeffrey S. Durham, Awaken: A Tibetan Buddhist
Journey toward Enlightenment. Richmond: Virginia Mu-
seum of Fine Arts. Distributed by Yale University Press, 2019.
John Carpenter, ed., The Tale of Genji: A Japanese Classic Illuminated.
New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2019.
Forrest McGill, ed., The Rama Epic: Hero, Heroine, Ally, Foe. San 
Francisco: Asian Art Museum, 2016.
Each of these works illuminates the development of a civilization through 
its art and writing—both its calligraphy and great stories. This review 
travels across four civilizations that are quite distinct, even though they 
all share some common features, such as the influence of Buddhism. 
Each book under review illustrates the tensions that occur between a 
quest for material gain and spiritual enlightenment. A contemporary observer
will also note that shared cultural values among some countries 
have done little to transcend tensions born of nationalism and power 
politics.
Each book tells us about a wide range of people and their ways 
of life. Each presents art and writing by top leaders, their consorts, 
diplomats and other officials, scholars, monks, artisans, workers, and 
even slaves. Each book tracks human culture from ancient times to the 
present. Each may provoke contemporary social scientists to step back 
and consider the broad context in which humans and their organizations 
evolve, contesting and sometimes cooperating with one another. Ars longa,
vita brevis derives from a longer aphorism attributed to Hippocrates: 
“Life is short, and art long; the crisis fleeting; experience perilous, and 
decision difficult”—useful caveats for politicians, social scientists, and 
most everyone else.
 164 Ars longa, vita brevis
In a similar vein, readers of Asian Perspective may want to ruminate
on a message in the Diamond Sutra found within a pagoda in Ko-
rea’s North Cholla Province (Little and Moon, p. 159). Similar to Plato’s
flickering shadows on a cave wall, but more colorful, this Buddhist 
poem reads:
All conditioned phenomena
Are like a dream, an illusion, a bubble, a shadow,
Like dew or a flash of lightning;
Thus we shall perceive them.
Beyond the Line focuses on the past two thousand years, but its 
first image shows rubbings of spirited petroglyphs on a cliff near Ulsan. 
Dating from about 5,000 BCE, the glyphs depict whales, turtles, sharks, 
seals, tigers, hunting scenes, and man-made tools, as well as human and 
shamanistic figures. Their strong and joyous movements might remind 
a modern observer of Picasso and Matisse.
Korean calligraphy has reflected the changing face of politics and 
culture. For two millennia, Korean elites used ideographic Chinese 
characters to convey Korean words—a script known as hanja. This difficult-to-master
practice was challenged by King Sejong of the Chosun 
dynasty who, in the mid-fifteenth century, commissioned scholars to 
develop a phonetic script geared to the structure and sounds of Korean 
speech—later called hangeul. Relatively easy to learn, the script enabled
elite women and some commoners to become literate, but many 
officials and scholars distained a writing system easily accessible to all. 
Not until Christian missionaries began to establish elementary schools 
at the end of the nineteenth century did serious efforts to foster mass 
literacy using hangeul begin. The first newspaper published entirely in 
hangeul, entitled the Independent, appeared in 1896.
While foreign missionaries promoted hangeul, some anti-Japanese 
patriots used traditional hanja calligraphy to reassert Korean identity. For 
example, Ahn Junggeun, who assassinated the Japanese resident-general
Ito Hirobumi in 1909, produced nearly two hundred fiercely national-
ist hanja scrolls stamped by his inked handprint during the weeks before 
his execution (an example of which may be seen at Little and Moon, 
p. 330). After Japan annexed Korea in 1910, however, the occupiers 
labored to deracinate Korea and Nipponize its culture. The Japanese occupiers
taught hangeul to peasants to facilitate control but discouraged 
hangeul among Korea’s educated classes, whom they forced to use Japanese
in documents and literary works. This was the milieu in which the 
 Walter C. Clemens, Jr. 165
Society for the Study of the Korean Language (founded in 1921) established
“Hangeul Day,” the anniversary of the wood-print publication in 
1446 of the guidebook Proper Sounds for the Instruction of the People. 
No other society so honors its writing system. Germans celebrate the 
anniversary of Luther’s posting of his ninety-five theses in 1517 but not 
his rendering of the Bible in the vernacular (BBC 2017).
An essay by Lee Dongkook in Beyond the Line stresses that the 
characters used in Chinese calligraphy are not the written language of 
China alone, but are shared throughout East Asia. Before kana was created
in Japan or hangeul in Korea, Chinese characters were used across 
East Asia for 2,500 to 3,000 years. All three nations—China, Japan, 
Korea—formed one large brush-and-ink community, in which unique 
calligraphies developed over the centuries (p. 115). Vietnamese calligraphy,
done with a brush, also used Chinese characters known as Chữ 
nôm and the Latin-based Quốc ngữ. Since the era of French Indochina, 
however, the Latin alphabet quốc ngữ script gradually became the written
medium of both government and popular literature.
Lee Dongkook argues that calligraphy harmonizes with meaning, 
such as a poem about the seasons. The core of calligraphy is the stroke 
itself. In hanja cultures, concrete expression and abstraction are fused, 
using brush and ink. But when Japanese and Koreans encountered 
Western art, Lee Dongkook says, this gave their writing still another 
inflection. Some intellectuals argued that calligraphy is not art. Fine arts 
schools in Japan and Korea began to teach painting and sculpture but 
not calligraphy, which was viewed as an applied art. But Lee Dongkook 
asserts that “the line of the West and the stroke of East Asia are fundamentally
different” and that East Asian calligraphy cannot be compared 
to Western abstract art.
 As the ink brush was supplanted in daily use by Western writing implements,
Lee Dongkook writes, the ranks of calligraphers have thinned 
out and the quality of the work has become plainer and more uniform. 
This trend, one might infer, parallels the weakening in many quarters of 
ideology and religion, supplanted by a self-centered materialism.
While today’s politicians in Beijing, Tokyo, and Seoul contest each 
other over matters large and small, calligraphy links hanja and kana, 
hanja and hangeul, and even hanja and the alphabet. Lee Dongkook 
laments the deconstruction of script and the hybridization of scripts, but 
argues that similar but different scripts deriving from hanja are now 
combining to become one—“a new written language in today’s written 
word-image era” (p. 131). However, a student of man’s inhumanity to 
man might doubt that this trend can transcend and bind the wounds still 
 166 Ars longa, vita brevis
festering in these three countries many decades after World War II and 
the Korean War.
Beyond the Line contains more than one hundred images of Korean 
writing from ancient times to the present. One shows a passage rendered 
in Chinese script from the Tang dynasty by Syngman Rhee when he was 
president of the Republic. It states, “Let us go forward as much as we 
can and build up the great nation again” (pp. 342–343).
Let us move from Korea to another society on China’s periphery, 
now ruled from Beijing: Tibet. Unlike the Korean and Japanese writing 
systems, Tibetan script has nothing to do with Chinese calligraphy, but 
is an abugida of Indic origin, written not with a brush but with a charcoal 
bamboo stick on a wooden board.
Awaken is a gem for students and practitioners of art, meditation, 
Buddhism, and/or Asian culture. The book is lavishly illustrated with 
texts written in clear, nontechnical English. Besides the chapters by Rice 
and Durham, nearly half the pages in Awaken consist of essays by specialists
such as Katherine Anne Paul on “Tools of the Trade: Implements 
for Enlightenment” and Tsherin Sherpa with Paul Ferguson on “Traditional
and Contemporary Art from the Himalayas.”
Rice and Durham remind us that cell phones and other features of 
modern life keep us up but seldom deeply awake. Tibetan Buddhism 
aims to cultivate Vajrayana, the “Lighting Vehicle,” which aims to convey
practitioners rapidly to enlightenment. Tibetan scroll paintings are 
called thangka—“mirror.” To study a thangka is potentially to see an aspect
of one’s own mind and thereby obtain “liberation on sight” (p. ix).
The illustrations in this book aspire to give insights into what Tibetan
Buddhist art may conceal and reveal—a path (though not the only 
one) to a more focused, integrated, and wakeful state of awareness. 
Thus, on page 25 we see the bodhisattva Vajrapani (he who holds a vajra
thunder bolt) standing next to the Buddha, protecting him, on a gray 
schist sculptured relief done in second-century (what is now) Pakistan.
To shortcut through the eons usually required to achieve enlightenment,
Vajarayana instructs the aspirant meditator to think of himself/
herself as already enlightened. Thus, the “path” becomes the meditative 
simulation of the eventual result, the state of being a buddha.
The book would benefit from more comments on the styles characteristic
of Tibetan art. Many Westerners will be puzzled and even put off 
by the garish red-orange colors around blackish figures in many paintings.
The wildly colored monsters threatening goodness may put some 
aesthetes’ teeth on edge and push them away from inner calm. More 
explanatory comment might calm the agitation. The chapter on ancient 
 Walter C. Clemens, Jr. 167
innovations and thangka treasures says that figures in certain thangka
paintings receive heavy-handed shading on the edges of the limbs. 
While intended to create the impression of volume, without explanation 
this technique creates a marionette-like effect.
Awaken ends with a chapter by a “transformer,” Tsherin Sherpa, 
who reproduces (and teaches) traditional art and goes on to create contemporary
abstracts that convey similar ideas. In 2003 he was com-
missioned by Jamba Juice in San Francisco to create a poster for its 
“enlightened smoothie” campaign. The poster (Figure 83 in the book) 
shows the many fruits, lotus flowers, and celestial forces (but no Buddhist
deities) said to enliven a Jamba drink. The poster, plastered on sub-
way walls, encouraged other Himalayan artists. One such creation (in 
Figure 84) shows the author of Genesis composing his text in colors that 
could derive from Tibetan art. But Tsherin Sherpa cautions that tradition 
is in decline no matter the signs it is thriving. There is little demand for 
such art, and old masters are passing on.
Unlike Korea and Tibet, Japan does not border on China but has 
also been heavily influenced by it. Still, a Japanese noblewoman known 
as Murasaki Shikibu wrote what is arguably the world’s first novel, The 
Tale of Genji, around 1,000 CE. As word of her literary prowess spread, 
she was invited to serve as tutor for the empress to Emperor Ichijö. In 
this role the author continued to write The Tale of Genji, which gradually
expanded to fifty-four chapters. By 1020, the saga as we know it had 
taken shape and was circulating among the upper echelons of Japanese 
society.
As Sano Midori writes in the preface to this work, a catalogue for an 
exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, March 5–June 16, 2019, 
the tale reads like a coming-of-age story about a man who, heartbroken 
over his forbidden love for his father’s consort, engages in one assignation
after another as he seeks out the ideal woman.
Over the centuries, The Tale of Genji has inspired countless Japanese
artists to illustrate scene after scene of this long and complex 
adventure. Other than the Bible, there may be no comparable Western 
work of literature whose episodes and characters have so often been pictorialized.
The Met catalogue shows that the tale inspired a multitude of 
art forms—from intimately scaled albums and fans to boldly designed 
hanging scrolls and screen paintings. Scenes from the tale also adorned 
silk robes, lacquer boxes, containers for grooming tools and writing implements,
incense burners, and palanquins for transporting young brides 
to their new residences.
 168 Ars longa, vita brevis
Essays by four leading experts precede the catalog section of this 
book. They show the complex interplay between text and image, narrative
content, decorative intent, functionality, and beauty. Melissa Mc-
Cormick, professor of Japanese art and culture at Harvard, provides a 
useful appendix: “Genji at a Glance”—fifty-four scenes from the tale 
summarized in a pair of screens by a seventeenth-century artist. She 
expands this summary in her book-length The Tale of Genji: A Visual 
Companion (Princeton University Press, 2018), with paintings and calligraphy
from the Genji Album (1510) in the Harvard Art Museums, the 
oldest dated set of Genji illustrations known to exist.
The rich text and illustrations include a poem by Murasaki, written 
sometime after the death of her husband, with whom she lived just three 
years.
Is there a fate
That could at least
Bring satisfaction?
The truth I realize
But cannot yet accept.
Having read the old letters of a recently deceased female friend at court, 
Murasaki wrote,
Who will read it?
Who will live forever
In this world?
A letter left behind
In her undying memory.
Let us end with a story from another civilization adjacent to China 
and Tibet, but separated by some of the world’s highest mountains. The 
story’s origins in India are shrouded in the mists of time and legend, 
but the Ramayana is a keystone of Hindu scripture, also rendered (like 
Tibetan) across South and Southeast Asia in Indic Brahmic scripts. The 
Rama Epic, like the other books reviewed here, is illustrated with gorgeous
full-color reproductions of art inspired by the basic story, with 
commentary by a handful of scholars expert on its different aspects.
 The spread of Hinduism across South and Southeast Asia meant 
that the Rama epic was retold in the languages of many cultures—from 
Afghanistan in the west to the Philippines in the east, from Tibet in the 
north to Sri Lanka in the south, and in many forms across India. The 
 Walter C. Clemens, Jr. 169
image of Prince Rama, part human and part divine, has been established 
and respected in the minds and hearts not only of Hindus but also of 
Jains, Buddhists, and Muslims. His story has been told and enacted in 
many languages, from Annamese and Balinese to Sanskrit and Tibetan.
For Hindus, Rama is an incarnation of Lord Vishnu but also the 
ideal son, husband, brother, warrior, and universal sovereign of a utopian
age. The story of Rama and his wife Sita form part of the Hindu 
epic Mahabharata. Rama and an army of monkeys storm the island of 
Lanka to save Sita from the ten-headed demon Ravana, who has kidnapped
Sita. The story illustrates the expectation that a divine figure 
will descend periodically to cleanse the earth of evil. A similar belief 
permeates Buddhist and Jain versions of the tale, even though they deny 
the salvific power of Rama or any other deity. Just as Rama was exiled 
from his own father’s kingdom, so Siddhartha chose to leave comfort 
for a life of asceticism.
For Buddhists, Rama is a wise prince who exemplifies the Buddhist 
virtues of stoicism and control of one’s emotional life. For Jains, Rama 
is not a god but an ideal Jain layman destined to be reborn as one of the 
sixty-three holy men and teachers who appear from time to time to teach 
the Jain dharma to the world. For Muslims in Malaysia and Indonesia, 
Rama serves as the model for an Islamic believer.
The cultural forces depicted in the four books reviewed suggest that, 
as Hippocrates put it, “art is long.” But none of these forces is cosmopolitan,
like the Transcendentalism of Ralph Waldo Emerson, Margaret 
Fuller, and Henry David Thoreau. None calls for an embrace of persons 
from other civilizations and recognition of their dignity despite cultural 
and ethnic differences. Nationalism in each of the cultures discussed 
here (and others as well, from Russia and Europe to the United States) 
seems to grow stronger. The Republic of Korea and Japan are again 
at odds over issues past and present. Tibetan resentment over Chinese 
repression simmers and could erupt if cracks appear in Beijing’s system 
of controls. Like other faiths, Hinduism can spark hate and bloodshed 
as well as love and compassion. The Mahabharata instructs Hindus that 
fate and honor may demand a war even though it destroys all sides. As 
Prime Minister Narendra Modi curtailed the autonomy of Kashmir in 
August 2019, Arundhati Roy (2019) warned of a “new phenomenon of 
mobs surrounding people, Muslims in particular, and forcing them to 
chant ‘Jai Shri Ram!’ (‘Victory to Lord Ram!’)” (Schultz 2019). If Hindu-dominated
India and Muslim Pakistan again come to blows, perhaps 
this time with nuclear arms, the apocalyptic vision of the Mahabharata 
could be fulfilled.
 170 Ars longa, vita brevis
A possible bottom line: each of the civilizations represented in these 
four books is a glorious achievement for humans, but embodies a narrow 
outlook unsuited for a world in which every unit is interdependent. Each 
cultural heritage depicted here is parochial compared to Walt Whitman’s 
“Salut au Monde” in his Leaves of Grass (1860–1861), though no more 
myopic than the “Make America Great” again outlook of today’s White 
House and its supporters.
References
BBC. 2017. “Reference: Four Things about the 500th Anniversary Celebrations.” 
October 17, www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-41817418.
Roy, Arundhati. 2019. “The Silence Is the Loudest Sound.” New York Times, August 
15.
