Asian Perspective 42 (2018), 285-296
BOOK REVIEW ESSAY
Can Nonviolent Action Shape Policy? 
People Power in East Asia and in the West
Walter C. Clemens Jr.
Brian Christopher Jones, ed., Law and Politics of the Taiwan Sun­
flower and Hong Kong Umbrella Movements (New York: Rout- 
ledge, 2017).
Jing Chen, Useful Complaints: How Petitions Assist Decentralized 
Authoritarianism in China (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 
2016).
Besides the hard power and soft power of governments and 
nonstate actors such as al-Qaeda, there is people power—nonviolent 
action by individuals and groups to alter government and its poli­
cies from below or outside. The anthology edited by Brian Christo­
pher Jones and the monograph by Jing Chen provide authoritative 
case studies that illustrate both the possibilities and limitations of 
citizen action to shape government policy. Each book is a must for 
anyone concerned with the future of Taiwan, Hong Kong, and 
China. Each volume raises issues for other countries as well, 
including the United States. Let us consider the broader context of 
nonviolent action in greater China and worldwide.
There is a huge literature on nonviolent protest, both as pas­
sive resistance and as active struggle (Powers and Vogele 1997). 
For most of recorded history, people power without weapons did 
not count for much. Nonviolent action by those who wished to 
challenge or change political authority was nearly unthinkable in 
most major countries. Instead, protesters resorted to violence, as 
in the German Peasants’ Revolts of the sixteenth century. Starting 
in eighteenth-century Europe and the United States, however, the 
potential of nonviolent action increased with growing acceptance 
of the belief that political authority requires the consent of the
285
 286 Can Nonviolent Action Shape Policy?
governed. Still, the American and French Revolutions were achieved 
with much violence.
A few individuals helped change the prospects of nonviolent 
resistance. Henry David Thoreau refused in 1849 to pay taxes to a 
government that permitted slavery and was invading Mexico. 
Thoreau acted alone in bearing witness against public wrongs— 
unlike the large-scale civil disobedience practiced by Martin 
Luther King, Jr., in the hope of actually changing the law. Ideas on 
civil disobedience have ricocheted around the world—from Lev 
Tolstoy’s Russia to Mahatma Gandhi’s India, King’s America, 
Lech Walesa’s Poland, Tiananmen Square, and the streets of Taipei 
and Hong Kong in 2014—usually with near-term losses but some­
times with long-term wins (Clemens 2014).
More than two millennia before the rise of republican and 
communist China, kings of the Zhou dynasty asserted that heaven 
would bless the authority of a just ruler but would withdraw its 
mandate from a despot. The Mandate of Heaven would then trans­
fer to those who would rule best. Throughout Chinese history, 
rebels who opposed the ruling dynasty claimed that the Mandate of 
Heaven had passed, giving them the right to revolt and then rule. 
In China, as elsewhere across the globe, armed rebellions took 
place, but political change by nonviolent action was rare. As the 
Manchu dynasty weakened in the late nineteenth and early twenti­
eth centuries, Sun Yatsen and other Chinese who had studied in the 
West brought to China the idea that the demos should rule.
China experienced many strikes, demonstrations, boycotts, and 
uprisings in the twentieth century. China’s first large-scale, nonvi­
olent direct action was the March Fourth movement in 1919. Thou­
sands of students and intellectuals, joined by business people and 
workers, protested the Paris treaty permitting Japan to take over 
many previously German privileges in China. The protests and 
strikes in May 1919 persuaded the government to reject the treaty 
but failed to secure broad reforms in politics, science, and literature. 
Though a strong nationalist, Chiang Kai-shek and other Confucian 
traditionalists criticized the May Fourth movement for corrupting 
youth: it weakened respect for authority and allowed inroads for 
Western culture. Still, May Fourth became an inspiring symbol of 
student activism. Subsequent mobilizations often occurred on its
 Walter C. Clemens Jr. 287
anniversary. There followed significant protests against both 
nationalist and communist policies and practices in 1923-1924, 
1925-1927, 1931, 1936-1937, 1942, and 1945-1946 (Li 1997b).
Open dissent became more difficult after 1949, when commu­
nists prevailed in China’s civil war, because the Chinese Commu­
nist Party (CCP) permitted no political action except that organ­
ized by the party or government. Challenges to CCP rule or 
doctrine were and still are severely punished. Still, Mao Zedong’s 
Hundred Flowers Campaign in 1956-1957 unleashed a flood of 
criticism that led him to mount an anti-rightist campaign that 
denounced and punished hundreds of thousands of intellectuals. 
Nonviolent action then disappeared until after Zhou Enlai’s death 
in 1976, when thousands mourned his passing in ways that 
attacked Mao as well as the Gang of Four. Thousands of demon­
strators were arrested and many killed, but the Gang of Four was 
soon ousted and Mao died of natural causes. In 1978 a new expres­
sion of protest emerged, the Democracy Wall in Beijing. The new 
paramount leader Deng Xiaoping did not tolerate these demands 
for change. He closed the wall, imprisoned many protesters, and 
amended the constitution to forbid demonstrations. During this 
period, hundreds of thousands of people came to Beijing or to 
provincial capitals to petition or demonstrate for redress of their 
grievances. There were general strikes in Yunnan in 1978, and in 
Shanghai in early 1979, each severely suppressed (Li 1997a).
Student demands for reform emerged again in 1989. The 
regime’s criticism and dismissal of students’ petitions, coupled with 
mixed signals from the CCP Politburo, prompted a demonstration 
lasting from May to June of more than 1 million students, joined by 
workers and members of independent associations, in Tiananmen 
Square. Mourning the death of CCP General Secretary Hu Yaobang 
in April, three students knelt before the Great Hall of the People 
holding a petition over their heads, but not a single high official 
received them. Students also demonstrated in other cities and sent 
delegates to Beijing. When the government proclaimed martial law 
on May 20, up to 2 million Beijing citizens were in the streets 
blocking the troops’ movements. On June 4, the People’s Liberation 
Army moved against the students and other demonstrators, killing 
as many as two thousand. The communist regime proceeded to
 288 Can Nonviolent Action Shape Policy?
intensify the isolation and alienation of the intellectual classes, 
which had become carriers of demands for social reform ever since 
the Manchu dynasty’s collapse (Li 1997c).
Organized dissent against authority in China and greater China 
has taken place against the backdrop of a long and complicated his­
tory in which Confucian respect for authority faced off against 
Taoist spontaneity and trust that “softness can conquer hardness”— 
buttressed or weakened by the teachings and praxis of “bourgeois” 
democracy and communism. Bringing this story to recent times, both 
the Sunflower and Umbrella movements in 2014 raised issues for 
democratic and authoritarian systems everywhere. Each movement 
showed the difficulty in claiming self-rule against the preferences of 
an adjacent authoritarian giant. The Jones book contains three essays 
specifically on the Sunflower movement in Taiwan and three on the 
Umbrella movement in Hong Kong, four essays comparing each 
case and two on the broad implications of each movement.
Jones writes that Taiwan’s Sunflower movement and Hong 
Kong’s Umbrella movement “demonstrated that civil disobedience 
in Asia can be just as democratically based, passionate, and effec­
tive as anything found in the West” (p. 1). But this claim is too 
broad. Consider each of the three elements: democracy, passion, 
and effectiveness. Yes, participants in each movement were “pas­
sionate,” but protesters in each case were a minority in each polity. 
The Sunflower movement received fairly strong public support, but 
the Umbrella movement did not receive broad approval from the 
people of Hong Kong. Many complained that the demonstrations 
interfered with traffic and business and risked a police crackdown.1 
One can argue about the degree to which either movement was 
effective. The Sunflower movement failed to end the “black box” 
decisionmaking performed by Taiwan’s executive on trade deals 
with little legislative oversight. (The Sunflowers protested the pass­
ing of the Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement by the ruling party, 
the Kuomintang, in the legislature without clause-by-clause review.) 
Nor did the Sunflowers achieve a national constitutional conven­
tion. On the other hand, the movement did contribute to the election 
of Taiwan’s first female president; it helped the Legislative Yuan to 
change hands for the first time ever; it challenged authority directly 
and made outspoken free speech an accomplished fact.
 Walter C. Clemens Jr. 289
The long-term effects of each movement remain to be seen. The 
Sunflower movement could be a step toward the further democra­
tization of Taiwan, with additional safeguards to let the people—not 
any political party—decide the country’s future. The Umbrella 
movement, however, failed in its immediate objective: more self- 
rule for Hong Kongers. The Sunflower movement protested official 
circumvention of established democratic decisionmaking proce­
dures, whereas the Umbrella movement struggled to expand demo­
cratic space within a quasi-autonomous political community subor­
dinated to an external authoritarian power. The latter project was far 
more fraught than the former (Roth 2017). Meanwhile, Chinese 
communist controls in Hong Kong (and in all of China) have 
become more repressive since 2014.
Jones claims that the Sunflower and Umbrella movements 
were democratic, passionate, and as effective as anything in the 
West. But their impact was limited compared to the civil resistance 
that helped to destroy the Soviet empire and the Yugoslav Federa­
tion. The Singing Revolution in the Baltic countries triggered their 
independence from Soviet rule and helped to catalyze a successful 
split from Soviet rule in Ukraine and even in Russia (Clemens 
1991; Smidchens 2014). The Baltic analogues to the Sunflower 
and Umbrella movements received strong backing from most of 
the demos and were energized by nationalist dislike for alien rule. 
As dominoes fell for the Communist Party west of Russia, the 
entire Soviet Empire across Eurasia also disintegrated—a process 
that also led to the collapse of the Yugoslav Federation.
The fate of popular resistance in mainland China has been 
darker than in Taiwan and Hong Kong. The students and others 
who demonstrated on Tiananmen Square from April to June 1989 
were passionate and were supported by many sectors and regions 
of China’s population, along with admirers in many other coun­
tries. Still, they were no match for the tanks and guns of the mili­
tary. Since 1989, most Chinese have avoided politics and focused 
on improving their material well-being. Their political emotions 
were bought off by economic rewards and sublimated in mindless 
nationalism. Liu Xiaobo, the only Chinese citizen to win a Nobel 
Peace Prize, was kept in a Chinese jail until he was nearly dead. 
As of late 2017, his widow was still under house arrest.2
 290 Can Nonviolent Action Shape Policy?
Some individual Chinese have tried to protest authoritarian 
rule. One of them, the artist Ai Weiwei, has intensified his efforts 
to support human rights in China and worldwide. Undaunted 
when Chinese authorities destroyed his studio in Shanghai, 
imprisoned him for months, and refused him permission to travel 
for a long time, Ai exhibited his work in thirteen countries in 
2017, including the United States, where he set up more than 300 
installations in New York City. In 2017, Ai Weiwei worked from 
Berlin, a one-man gang for political action, assisted by studio 
and logistics assistants.
Despite this dark picture, Jing Chen shows what could be a 
brighter aspect of China’s political life—the increasing use of 
petitions by the public to government authorities. While the Sun­
flower and Umbrella movements were novelties, petitions have 
long been a feature of China’s political life. Petitions were pre­
sented to CCP authorities in the run-up to the Tiananmen mas­
sacre, but their bearers were ignored, beaten, or arrested.
While the Hong Kong authorities backed by Beijing have 
rebuffed citizen demands for greater self-rule, the government in 
Beijing has paid attention to and sometimes acted on complaints 
expressed in citizen petitions. This process, Jing Chen argues, has 
helped authoritarian rule to survive within a highly decentralized 
system. How decentralized is China? Central authority is still 
strong, but China is increasingly decentralized, with local author­
ities having greater say than ever before on land use, public 
spending, and other economic matters. The Chinese government, 
Chen writes, is a de facto federation with six levels from central 
to village—in a world where the mean number of tiers was 3.6 in 
the mid-1990s. The petition process, she avers, helped China 
avoid the fate of communist regimes in the Soviet sphere, which 
were pressured to democratize or collapse or both.
The petition bureau is a key institution in China, says Chen. It 
manages grievances and provides information through an official 
channel by which people can voice their grievances and disclose 
corrupt behavior. It helps to aggregate grievances into policy rec­
ommendations. Armed with information provided by citizens, the 
central government evaluates citizens’ grievances and the per­
formance of local officials.
 Walter C. Clemens Jr. 291
Chen’s book is based on fieldwork in five provinces in 2008- 
2009 and research that uses both quantitative and qualitative meth­
ods. She employed content analysis to study petitions, then con­
ducted follow-up interviews with officials and ordinary citizens. 
Comparing how petitions worked in two villages, she finds that the 
township with the more efficient petition office was spared the occa­
sional violence that took place between officials and citizens in the 
other township. Comparing China and the Soviet Union, she con­
cludes that the failure of the Kremlin to keep abreast of local dis­
content contributed to the collapse of communist rule in the USSR.
Chen takes note of the sticks and carrots sometimes employed 
by local authorities to silence would-be petitioners. They include 
both “black prisons” to prevent citizens from complaining and 
“reverse bribes” to dissuade citizens from launching campaigns 
against them (pp. 168-169). Still, she is generally upbeat about the 
ways that petitions lubricate the system. Chen suggests that China’s 
handling of petitions must avoid the extremes: suppression of local 
dissent and crippling of local authority. She proposes that more 
adherence to the rule of law would help thread this needle.
A scholar in Beijing (Liu 2015, 31) opined that the petition 
system is “still an unsolved problem.” Despite much debate, “no 
consensus seems to have been reached. . . . The author thinks that 
the petition will always be a difficult problem which China has to 
face during the transition period.” The solutions being considered 
can alleviate pressure but cannot resolve all the difficulties. For an 
adequate response, the “overall advancement of the entire social 
system and concept is needed” (Liu 2015, 31). China needs a 
guiding law to institutionalize the petition process throughout the 
country. “Nondisclosure and informality” produce a vicious cir­
cle. The present “one project one discussion” mode does not 
work. “By enacting a guiding law in the petition field, the unity of 
the legal system can be realized so that internal contradictions and 
conflict in the system can be avoided” (Liu 2015, 35).
Many petitions respond to economic and other inequalities. 
While the Beijing leadership pledges to develop a harmonious and 
prosperous society, China experiences greater inequality than 
most industrialized countries. Professor Zhang Jun (2017) at Fudan 
University notes that in 1988 and 1995, China’s Gini coefficient of
 292 Can Nonviolent Action Shape Policy?
household wealth was just 0.34 and 0.4, respectively. But the coef­
ficient grew and peaked at 0.74 in 2010. China’s Gini coefficient is 
now comparable to that of the United States—circa 0.45 in recent 
years—but it exceeds the 0.24-0.36 range for most major devel­
oped economies. By 2014, the poorest 25 percent of Chinese 
households owned less than 2 percent of the country’s total wealth, 
while the top 1 percent owned one-third. Is there any way that cit­
izen action or one-party elections could narrow this gulf?
Comparing the Chinese system with the United States, Professor 
Chen notes that the right of the people “to petition the government 
for a redress of grievances” was guaranteed by the First Amendment 
(Chen 2016, 162-163). Over time, however, the importance of peti­
tion rights was neglected as the right to vote became more secure for 
most Americans. Still, the Obama administration established an 
online petition system known as We the People in 2011. It was still 
functioning in 2017. Some petitions endorsed President Donald 
Trump’s policies but most were liberal and critical. More than a mil­
lion signatures called for immediate release of Trump’s tax returns.
The US experience can also be seen as throwing cold water on 
the utility of organized protests such as the Sunflower and 
Umbrella movements and the petition system in China. Thousands 
of protesters took part in Occupy Wall Street in 2011-2012. They 
protested a capitalist system that they said fostered inequality. Their 
complaints became well known and generated much support, but 
the system they challenged did not budge. If such action achieved 
little in a relatively democratic society, what could it accomplish in 
a one-party state?
While the many channels of social media, radio, and television 
can serve as vehicles for complaint and petition, they have proba­
bly divided Americans more than united them for or against gov­
ernment policies. Also, moneyed interests continue to far outweigh 
public sentiment. Nearly every policy of the Trump administration 
favors the policy preferences of oil-coal-weapons-chemical mag­
nates regardless of popular sentiments. Most members of Congress 
bow to the National Rifle Association, even though most Ameri­
cans favor some kind of gun control.
Greater diversity in news and opinion media for Americans led 
to a paradoxical result in the November 2016 elections. As Julian
 Walter C. Clemens Jr. 293
Borger put it in The Guardian (November 19, 2017), “libertarians 
viscerally opposed to centralised power made common cause with a 
brutally autocratic state apparatus in Moscow, an American plutocrat 
with a deeply murky financial record, and the instinctively authori­
tarian far right.” Borger quoted Jamie Bartlet, director of the Center 
for Analysis of Social Media at the think tank Demos: “The radical 
libertarians and the autocrats are allied by virtue of sharing an enemy 
which is the mainstream, soft, establishment, liberal politics.” Steve 
Bannon noted that some Catholic conservatives admire Vladimir 
Putin because he stands for something traditional: nationalism.
Borger also reported that the European Union’s counterpropa­
ganda unit detected an upsurge in pro-Kremlin fake news on the 
Catalonia crisis in Spain. As for Italy, “the Five Star Movement 
(M5S), combines its anti-establishment stance at home with close 
alignment to Moscow’s line in foreign policy.” The M5S Web guru, 
Gianroberto Casaleggio, claimed that M5S is pioneering “a new, 
direct democracy that will see the elimination of all barriers 
between the citizen and the state.” He “established news sites that 
circulate conspiracy theories, many of them cross posted from 
Russian outlets. One such story suggested the US was covertly 
funding the flow of immigrants from Africa. It linked back to a 
story on Sputnik Italia” (Borger, 2017).
Reporting in Morocco on a conference of IT experts from 
around the world, Jim Hoagland (2017) reported a widespread 
view that “the communication revolution embodied in social media 
has hollowed out the political parties in democracies, enabling 
demagogues to whip up mobs by remote control.”
Americans are regularly told that they live in a great majoritarian 
democracy. The reality of American political life is very different, 
according to Benjamin Page and Martin Gilens (2017). They argue 
that “the wishes of ordinary Americans actually have had little or no 
impact on the making of federal government policy. Wealthy indi­
viduals and organized interest groups—especially business corpora­
tions—have had much more political clout.... The will of majorities 
is often thwarted by the affluent and the well-organized, who block 
popular policy proposals and enact special favors for themselves” 
(2017, 53). Majorities favor “programs to help provide jobs, increase 
wages, help the unemployed, provide universal medical insurance,
 294 Can Nonviolent Action Shape Policy?
ensure decent retirement pensions, and pay for such programs with 
progressive taxes. Most Americans also want to cut ‘corporate wel­
fare’” (2017, 54). Yet the wealthy interests and structural gridlock 
have mostly blocked such policies. Thanks to this “oligarchy,” as 
Page and Gilens call it, the United States ranks at or near the bottom 
of the list of rich nations when it comes to key measures of social 
health: economic disparity, intergenerational social mobility, racial 
inequality, racial segregation, infant mortality, poverty, child poverty, 
life expectancy, violence, incarceration, depression, literacy/numer- 
acy, and environmental sustainability and resilience.
“Elections alone,” Page and Gilens (2017, 5) caution, “do not 
guarantee democracy.” Their book shows that majority progres­
sive public opinion is regularly trumped by a complex of forces: 
campaign financing; candidate selection; lobbying; the policy 
agenda-setting power of wealthy activists; the special primary 
election influence of extreme party activists; the disproportion­
ately affluent, white, and older composition of the active (voting) 
electorate; the manipulation of voter turnout; the widespread dis­
semination of “distracting, confusing, misleading, and just plain 
false information” (2017, 55); unrepresentative political institu­
tions (the Electoral College, the unelected Supreme Court, the 
overrepresentation of the predominantly white rural population in 
the US Senate, and “one-party rule in the House of Representa­
tives” [2017, 56]); constitutional and related partisan government 
gridlock; and the fragmentation of authority in government.
Taking a very long view, it may be that civic action from below 
can over time shape the values and policies of society. Meanwhile, 
nonviolent protests have often drowned in miasmas of repression. 
Often their efforts achieved no immediate gains but, over time, fos­
tered healthy changes. The breadth and intensity of protests against 
police and grand jury treatment of blacks in twenty-first century 
America may produce major refinements in how the United States is 
governed. And while overt resistance may diminish in Hong Kong, 
it could resurface.3 The spirit of the Umbrella movement may spur 
unrest in China—not only among minorities but also among Han 
Chinese seeking greater freedoms and self-rule. These changes 
could multiply, not only because human conscience deserves to pre­
vail over raw power, but also because predatory exploitation tends to
 Walter C. Clemens Jr. 295
boomerang over time. Still, the most liberal changes in Taiwan pol­
itics came from above, when Chiang Ching-kuo became president in 
1978 and ended martial law in 1987 (Clemens with Zhan 1994).
It may be that democracy is at odds with capitalism, modern 
technology, or—more basically—with human nature. If so, citizen 
action such as the Sunflower and Umbrella movements cannot be 
expected to alter the policy orientations of those at the top of 
power pyramids. The successes of people power in Estonia, Latvia, 
and Lithuania will be difficult to replicate elsewhere. As Isaiah 
Berlin warned, “Out of the crooked timber of humanity, no straight 
thing was ever made.”
Notes
Walter Clemens is associate, Harvard University Davis Center for Russian 
and Eurasian Studies and professor emeritus of political science at Boston 
University. His most recent book is North Korea and the World: Human 
Rights, Arms Control, and Strategies for Negotiation (2016). He can be 
reached at wclemens@bu.edu.
1. See TVBS opinion polls cited by Jones and Su (2017, 16, note 3).
2. On “house arrest,” see Myers (2017).
3. Starting with a World Cup qualifier against Qatar in 2015, Hong 
Kongers concerned about Beijing’s increasing control over the territory 
booed China’s national anthem at football games. Attempting to curb such 
behavior, China’s National People’s Congress in September 2017 extended 
to Hong Kong and Macau a law to punish “disrespecting” the anthem with 
three years in prison. In October 2017 Hong Kong fans turned their backs as 
the anthem was played during a qualifier against Malaysia, and some spec­
tators jeered and made rude gestures before a friendly match against Laos. 
Some Hong Kongers said they would enter the stadium after the anthem was 
played or find their way to the restroom during its performance. Law pro­
fessors in Hong Kong wondered if the punishment could be levied against 
thousands of football fans (BBC 2017).
References
BBC 2017. “China Brings Anthem Disrespect Laws to Hong Kong.” Novem­
ber 2, www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-41870206.
Borger, Julian. 2017. “Disruption Games: Why Are Libertarians Lining Up 
with Autocrats to Undermine Democracy?” The Guardian, November 
19, https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/nov/19/trump-russia 
-fake-news-libertarians-autocrats-democracy.
Clemens, Walter C., Jr. 1991. Baltic Independence and Russian Empire. New 
York: St. Martin’s Press.
 296 Can Nonviolent Action Shape Policy?
--------- . 2014. “The Power of Conscience: From Concord to Hong Kong.”
Global Asia Forum, December 22, www.globalasia.org/bbs/board.php 
?bo_table=forum&wr_id=7546.
Clemens, Walter C., Jr., with Jun Zhan. 1994. “Chiang Ching-kuo’s Role in 
the ROC-PRC Reconciliation.” American Asian Review, vol. 12, no. 1 
(Spring), pp. 140-163.
Hoagland, Jim. 2017. “The Fourth Industrial Revolution Is Upon Us.” Wash­
ington Post, November 22 at https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions 
/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-is-upon-us/2017/11/22/5ff97086-cd62 
-11 e7-9d3 a-bcbe2af5 8c3 a_story.html?utm_term=. 60fec 1 Od312e.
Jones, Brian Christopher, and Yen-Tu Su. 2017. “Confrontational Contesta­
tion and Democratic Compromise: The Sunflower Movement and Its 
Aftermath.” In Brian Christopher Jones, ed., Law and Politics of the 
Taiwan Sunflower and Hong Kong Umbrella Movements. London: 
Routledge, pp. 15-29.
Li, Fang. 1997a. “China.” In Roger S. Powers and William B. Vogele, eds., 
Protest, Power, and Change: An Encyclopedia of Nonviolent Action 
from ACT-UP to Womans Suffrage. New York: Garland, pp. 73-81.
--------- . 1997b. “May Fourth Movement (China).” In Roger S. Powers and
William B. Vogele, eds., Protest, Power, and Change: An Encyclopedia 
of Nonviolent Action from ACT-UP to Woman’s Suffrage. New York: 
Garland, pp. 315-316.
--------- . 1997c. “Tiananmen Square Democracy Movement, Beijing, 1989.”
In Roger S. Powers and William B. Vogele, eds., Protest, Power, and 
Change: An Encyclopedia of Nonviolent Action from ACT-UP to Woman's 
Suffrage. New York: Garland, pp. 524-527.
Liu, Fei. 2015. “An Analysis of Institutionalizing Petition System in China.” 
CS Canada Cross-Cultural Communication, vol. 11, no. 2, www.cscanada 
.net/index.php/ccc/article/view/6372.
Myers, Steven Lee. 2017. “In China, the Brutality of ‘House Arrest.’” New 
York Times, November 25, www.nytimes.com/2017/ll/25/opinion/in 
-china-the-brutality-of-house-arrest.html.
Page, Benjamin I., and Martin Gilens. 2017. Democracy in America? What 
Has Gone Wrong and What We Can Do About It. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Powers, Roger S., and William B. Vogele, eds. 1997. Protest, Power, and 
Change: An Encyclopedia of Nonviolent Action from ACT-UP to Woman’s 
Suffrage. New York: Garland.
Roth, Brad R. 2017. “Democratic Political Obligation with Chinese Charac­
teristics: Civic Defiance in Taiwan and Hong Kong.” In Brian Christo­
pher Jones, ed., Law and Politics of the Taiwan Sunflower and Hong 
Kong Umbrella Movements. London: Routledge, pp. 191-204.
Smidchens, Guntis. 2014. The Power of Song: Nonviolent National Culture in 
the Baltic Singing Revolution. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Zhang Jun. 2017. “China’s Vision for the Next 30 Years.” Project Syndi­
cate, November 14, www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/china-19th 
-congress-development-blueprint-by-zhang-jun-2017-11.
