Exploring the American Idea 
at the New York Public Library 
Jean L. Freer 
In the aftermath of the Second World War, as American society adjusted to 
the political and international landscape of the early Cold War, librarians exam­
ined the role of libraries as agencies of culture. With mounting fears about Com­
munist expansion, government agencies, foundations, and the mass media un­
dertook efforts to educate citizens about the meaning of democracy. Librarians, 
following intense wartime activity, returned to questions about the public library's 
appropriate clientele and collections. At the New York Public Library a new 
reading and discussion group, "Exploring the American Idea" (EAI), merged 
these strands of societal and professional concerns. Focused on the meaning of 
the American democratic tradition in turbulent times, EAI can be viewed as part 
of the postwar effort to create a liberal consensus around democratic values. An 
adult education program based on the Great Books model, EAI can be regarded 
as the embodiment of the library as an agency of culture providing serious works 
to an educated elite. A closer look, however, suggests that as it developed, Ex­
ploring the American Idea gave participants room to question the liberal consen­
sus and offered the library a means to expand its audience beyond its traditional 
base. 
In the decade before the war, librarians struggled to define their role in the 
burgeoning adult education movement. The American Library Association (ALA) 
had been a charter member of the American Association of Adult Education 
(AAAE) founded in 1926 with the support of the Carnegie Corporation, and 
among the myriad religious, farm, university, and civic groups involved in adult 
education only librarians served whole communities and supported the spec0026-3079/2001/4203-135$2.50/0
American Studies, 42:3 (Fall 2001): 135-154 
135 
 136 Jean L. Preer 
trum of adult educators. Through the 1930s, however, the profession was di­
vided between those who questioned the educational role of the library and those 
who welcomed the role and believed librarians should be in the lead. In 1941 
Ralph Beals observed that the scope and functions of the American public li­
brary were in dispute, even among librarians. While agreeing on the role of 
libraries as conservators of culture and as "service stations for the ready supply 
of answers to miscellaneous questions," many were skeptical of education as an 
ultimate objective of the library.* 
At the New York Public Library (NYPL), however, the adult education con­
cept infused the approach to adult services.^ Since 1928, when Jennie Flexner 
established the Readers' Adviser's Office, the library had sought to offer ser­
vices to adults comparable to that offered to children and other specialized cli­
entele. Through individual consultations, the office suggested courses of read­
ings to meet the interests and goals of each reader. Under Flexner's leadership, 
the office also developed extensive group services to the unemployed during the 
Depression and to immigrants fleeing Europe in the late 1930s. Bibliographies 
prepared for such radio shows as "Town Meeting of the Air" extended the reach 
of the library, but in a supportive rather than independent role. 
With the outbreak of war, librarians turned their attention from parochial 
professional debates to the practical matter of supporting the war effort. Other 
professional priorities, including the nascent quest for federal funding, were put 
on hold as librarians plunged into the Victory Bond campaign and turned their 
libraries into War Information Centers. The war heightened rhetoric about li­
brary and democracy. Speakers from Librarian of Congress Archibald MacLeish 
to President Franklin Delano Roosevelt equated libraries and democracy, her­
alding the role of libraries in creating the informed citizemy and preserving the 
cultural heritage that would win the war.^ Seeking a role comparable to the Li­
brary War Service that had boosted the visibility of libraries during World War I, 
pubHc libraries emphasized their role as community information centers rather 
than as cultural agencies.'* 
Following the war, the tension between the library as an agency of adult 
education meeting the needs of a well-educated few and as a political agency 
undergirding the democratic process became more apparent. Picking up the pieces 
of the national plan for library service developed in 1943, librarians resumed 
lobbying for federal assistance to support the creation of public libraries in 
underserved, largely rural areas. Proposed by Emily Taft Douglas in 1946, the 
Public Library Service Demonstration Bill echoed the democratic rhetoric of 
the war years, with supporters ritually heralding the library as the embodiment 
of democratic values.^ Indeed, the library extension effort was premised on the 
belief that democracy required and depended on libraries within the reach of all 
citizens. 
While federal support for rural libraries suggested the widest possible reach 
for library service, librarians in urban areas in 1946 adopted a new adult educa­
tion initiative based on the Great Books curriculum and aimed at a limited, self-
 Exploring the American Idea 137 
selected audience. This approach assumed that the classic texts of western civi­
lization could profitably be read by anyone with an interest, regardless of their 
educational background. Small groups of about thirty were to meet every two 
weeks with lay leaders trained in the Socratic method. Public libraries in Chi­
cago and Cleveland led the way, drawing serious readers to the library for dis­
cussion and debate. 
Begirming also in 1946, the Public Library Inquiry joined questions about 
the public library's role as an agency of adult education with doubts about the 
profession's faith in the library as an embodiment of democratic values.^ Under­
taken at first to examine persormel issues, the inquiry grew into a fiill-blown 
study of the current status of virtually every aspect of American public libraries, 
including not only staffing, but also funding, governance, and how libraries were 
actually being used by the American public. Funded by the Carnegie Corpora­
tion, the study was conducted by the Social Science Research Council and led 
by Robert Leigh heading a team of social scientists and advised by a committee 
including Ralph A. Beals of the New York Public Library.' 
Ralph Beals, appointed NYPL director in 1946, was connected to several of 
these strands of library concern and activity. An early proponent of library adult 
education, he had served on the staff of the American Association for Adult 
Education fi-om 1933 to 1939. As Assistant Director of the District of Columbia 
Public Library, firom 1940 to 1942, he had spearheaded the library's war activi­
ties, transforming his office into a War Information Center and heading the ALA's 
War Service Committee on Information and Education.^ Beals had then served 
as director of the library and dean of the Graduate Library School at the Univer­
sity of Chicago. While there, he, had become a close associate of Robert M. 
Hutchins, president of the university and proponent, with Mortimer Adler, of the 
Great Books approach to learning. Beals joined the board of the Great Books 
Foundation when it was created in 1947.' 
Beals's scholarly background and his interest in community outreach 
matched the dual identity of the New York Public Library as both a privately 
endowed, research institution and a metropolitan public library. The library's 
intemal organization reflected this division. The Reference Department main­
tained the research collections and served the clientele of the Central Library at 
Fifth Avenue and 42nd Street; the Circulation Department oversaw the library's 
Carnegie branches funded by the city budget. Similarly, NYPL seemed to have 
found a middle ground in tiie debate over whether the public library should meet 
the more serious educational needs of its users or cater to their more popular 
reading demands. The library assumed its readers would be interested in the best 
works and able to appreciate tiiem. At the 1936 conference of the American 
Library Association, Esther Johnston, head of the NYPL Central Circulation 
Branch, warned against underestimating the taste and intelligence of borrowers. 
Making a plea for "the reader of apparently ordinary tastes whose potentialities 
are apt to be overlooked," she argued against lowering standards by too much 
popularizing.^'^ The introduction of the Great Books program, at Beals's sug-
 138 Jean L Preer 
gestion in 1947, " demonstrated this confidence in readers. Open to anyone 
interested, the Great Books program had no special educational qualifications, 
but as described in an NYPL brochure, put the burden on the participant: 
This type of social reading requires your active participation. 
. . . The trained leaders will not tell you what you should think 
about the books. You will express your own understanding of 
what you read and will exchange your views with those of 
other members of the group. The leaders will not deliver lec­
tures on the authors or the books; they will simply help the 
discussion by asking questions.'^ 
In the first three series of Great Books, only The Federalist Papers and works by 
Thoreau were by Americans, although several, including those by John Locke, 
John Stuart Mill, and Adam Smith, had significantly influenced American po­
litical thought. 
In the aftermath of World War II and the early years of the Cold War, inter­
est in the meaning of democracy was widespread. Using programs and exhibits, 
the NYPL responded to this interest and used it to promote the library. The 
journey of the Freedom Train from September 1947 to January 1949 spurred 
such activity. Funded by the new, non-partisan American Heritage Foundation, 
comprised largely of business and media executives, the train displayed impor­
tant documents of United States history from Columbus's discovery of America 
to the 1945 United Nations Charter.'^ A library brochure showed a toy train 
heading up the steps of the Central Building where the library displayed copies 
of documents on the train and related materials from its own collections.''* In 
each of the exhibited documents, "there [was] to be found a principle—a thread 
of history—which was to become an essential part of the American tradition."" 
A "Heritage of Freedom" brochure for Staten Island branches invited additional 
reading on the heritage theme including biographies of George Washington, 
Abraham Lincoln, and Abigail Adams, John Brown's Body, Leaves of Grass, 0 
Pioneers! and Folk Song U.S.A. by John Lomax."' 
After the Freedom Train departed, the N YPL's Branch Library Book News, 
continued the heritage theme with a lengthy bibliographic essay, "Exploring the 
American Mind" by Margaret E. Monroe, assistant readers' adviser .Mixing 
historical monographs, biographies, novels, poetry, folklore, and government 
reports, Monroe's list included works by dissenters from the American tradition, 
notably Henry George and Eugene V. Debs, and those excluded from its privi­
leges, notably women and the poor, represented by Jane Addams and LiUian 
Wald. Surprisingly, given the library's own notable Schomberg Collection and 
its interest in race relations,"* there were no African American writers on the list, 
although it included Gunnar Myrdal's An American Dilemma and Gustave 
Myers's A History of Bigotry in the United States. The issue also included lists 
of American historical novels,'^ books by and about women,^'^ and information 
 Exploring the American Idea 139 
F R t £ D C M '!" R A ? ^̂  
L I B R A R T 
Figure 1: A brochure invited the public to follow a visit to the Freedom Train 
with a trip to the New York Public Library. "The Freedom Train Leads to the 
Library." Courtesy of New York Public Library Archives, The New York Public 
Library, Astor, Lenox and Tilden Foundations. 
 140 Jean L. Freer 
on upcoming programs on the library's radio show, "Treasury of the Spoken 
Word," including Ralph Bellamy reading from "Leaves of Grass," Donald Crisp 
on Longfellow's poems, and Clifton Fadiman on Patrick Henry. 
As pressures from censors and anti-communist politicians increased in the 
late 1940s, the library had its own interest in the interpretation of basic demo­
cratic values. Books in New York City school libraries had been challenged, and 
the New York Public Library itself faced concerns about owning or lending con­
troversial works. When a New York state court in November 1946 declared 
Edmund Wilson's Memoirs of Hecate County to be obscene, the library removed 
the book from circulation and informed readers on the waiting list that it was no 
longer available.^^ In 1948, the New York City schools had banned The Nation 
because of Paul Blanshard's articles criticizing the Catholic Church.^^ Meeting 
in Atlantic City in June 1948, the American Library Association, under its presi­
dent Paul North Rice, chief of the NYPL Reference Department, condemned 
censorship as a threat to democracy and reaffirmed the Library Bill of Rights, 
adopted originally in 1939. Describing the library as "an institution of education 
for democratic living," it stated that "the library should welcome the use of its 
meeting rooms for socially useful and cultural activities and discussion of cur­
rent pubUc questions" with meeting rooms available on equal terms regardless 
of the beliefs and affihations of their members.^ 
With the meaning of the American democracy a practical as well as a schol­
arly matter, Beals convened a Committee on the American Tradition, in fall 1949, 
at the Ubrary to develop a plan to "provide an environment favorable to reading 
and reflection on what the American way of life is."^ After reading and discuss­
ing numerous works, the committee in February 1950 unanimously endorsed 
implementation of a reading and discussion project at the library to promote the 
understanding of American democracy: 
We look upon this SOTCS of readings and discussions . . . as an 
attempt to find the hving tradition of America. It is an attempt 
to analyze the ideas important in the development of this tra­
dition and to relate them to the present. It is an intellectual 
adventure in which the ideals of our culture—sometimes 
unattained or disregarded—are reexamined through writings 
expressive of fundamental viewpoints which are now a part of 
our heritage.^^ 
The committee's tentative reading list included the Declaration of Inde­
pendence and the Constitution, Thomas Paine's The Age of Reason, Alexis de 
Tocqueville's Democracy in America, writings by Henry David Thoreau, 
Abraham Lincoln, Walt Whitinan ("On Ontario's Blue Shore"), William V. 
Moody ("Ode in Time of Hesitation"), John Dewey and Woodrow Wilson. Re­
cent works included the Report of the President's Committee on Civil Rights, 
the United Nations' Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and a selection by 
 Exploring the American Idea 141 
David Lilienthal, former head of the Tennessee Valley Authority and current 
chair of the Atomic Energy Conunission. The committee had also considered 
works by Ben Franklin, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry Adams, Lincoln Steffens, 
John Woolman, and James Bryce and continued to refine its list. In May 1950 
the committee recommended to Beals that the readings be tested in two or three 
experimental groups using the Great Books model. "By this we mean the fol­
lowing: Two leaders who use the Socratic method. Small groups of approxi­
mately 15-20 members. Two hour meetings every other week."^^ The committee 
presented a fully developed reading list. Paine, Moody, and Dewey had been 
removed, while George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and Oliver Wendell 
Holmes had been added. The list included background information on each read­
ing, questions for discussion, and information on the document's availability.^^ 
Tellingly, the committee used as the program theme a quotation from the 
foreword of This I Do Believe by David Lilienthal, published by Harper & Broth­
ers in 1949. "What as individuals can we do to safeguard and nourish this great 
inheritance?" Lilienthal asked. "I say: Search our minds and our souls and find 
out what it is we believe about democracy and about America."^^ To anyone 
following the rightward tilt of Congress, the use of this quotation seemed to 
signal where the library stood in the debates over the meaning of democracy. As 
former head of TVA, Lilienthal was associated with New Deal government now 
seen by some as socialism tending toward Communism. Lilienthal had written 
this statement of his political faith after a tense confumation hearing before the 
Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy, in February 1947, when Sena­
tor Kenneth D. McKellar (D-Teim.) accused him of having leftist sympathies 
and demanded to know his convictions on Communist doctrine. In this fore­
shadowing of McCarthyism, Lilienthal's passionate defense of democracy as an 
affirmative doctrine built on the rights of die individual attracted widespread 
attention. 
The initial EAI texts and questions for discussion reflected the liberal con­
sensus of postwar values. Based on rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of hap­
piness, guarded by freedom of religion and speech, this view assumed the need 
of a strong central government to protect individual liberty, accomplish the 
nation's purposes, and work toward the realization of American ideals. This strong 
government must be balanced by active citizen participation and resistance to 
tyranny through the constitutional process. For a discussion of the Declaration 
of Independence, the EAI reading list suggested, among others, these questions: 
"In what ways are men equal? Why are govemments instituted? May a govern­
ment be overthrown? In the list of abuses are there any we would accept without 
protest today?"^^ Throughout, democracy was seen as the means to solve the 
problems of democracy. 
Thus Exploring the American Idea implicitly challenged the idea of Ameri­
can society as one of pluralistic harmony and widely shared consensus. Indeed, 
the proposed questions suggested that major differences could exist on the fun­
damental nature of American democracy. Unlike the Freedom Train, which al-
 142 Jean L. Freer 
mmm 
Y o u a r e I n ^ r l ^ 
T h u r s d a y , J a n u a r y 
S p e a k e r ? JM^ 
"Why hm^riam 
_tij»,._ J k ^ r i QM 
S e e a 
THE B I ^ « A T X O H OF I l ^ i p 
UNIVERSAL DECMRATION O f 
R I O H f S ^ , M 
A c l t y - w l d e g r o u p o f t e n i a«n a n d 
women w i l l e x a m i n e t h e f u n d a m e n t a l 
p r i n c i p l e s o f t h e s e d o o u a a n t s 
w h i c h a r e t h e b a s i s f o r o u r c i v i l 
l i , b e r t i e s t o d a y a n d i n t h e f u t u r e . 
T h e l e a d e r s : M r s , C h a r l e s A l l e n 
H r . J o h n S u i t o n !• 
H e r e ' s a c h a n c e t o v i s i t , t o o b ­
s e r v e , a n d t o a s k q u e s t i o n s . . 
O p e n t o t h e p u b l i c - FREE 
Figure 2: To generate interest in the new program, the library sponsored a 
demonstration of group discussion at the Countee Cullen Branch. "Exploring 
the American Idea-memo." Courtesy of New York Public Library Archives, The 
New York Public Library, Astor, Lenox and Tilden Foundations. 
 Exploring the American Idea 143 
lowed a brief glimpse of documents to the crowds filing through the exhibit, 
EAI required active engagement with the meaning of the texts. Rather than a 
prepackaged interpretation of the meaning of the American democratic tradi­
tion, the reading and discussion format of EAI put that interpretation up for 
consideration. It suggested that difference and dissent were part of not only the 
American past but also the American present and that citizenship involved ques­
tioning as well as accepting the basis of that tradition. 
Although the Great Books influence on Exploring the American Idea was 
apparent, the two programs diverged on the extent to which they allowed partici­
pants to challenge the set curriculum. They shared a belief that the discussion 
method of free and full investigation of ideas was the only proper basis for deci­
sion and that in the realm of ideas all decisions could be re-examined. Both used 
challenging primary texts and were open to all wishing to read the selections 
and to consider, in discussion, their major ideas. A single brochure advertised 
both discussion groups for fall IQSO,̂ *̂  and their leader training sessions met 
jointly. Among the first group of EAI leaders were two community people who 
had led Great Books discussions. 
But the Great Books reading courses were formulated by the Great Books 
Foundation in Chicago, with the same unchanging sequential series used by 
groups all over the country. EAI was based on this model with readings and 
discussion questions selected by librarians. Even in the experimental year, how­
ever, EAI groups chose their own topics and decided on their own readings. 
Mildred Mathews reported that at the Central Library two groups, largely made 
up of professional people, and a group in the Bronx, mostly housewives, fol­
lowed the prescribed program. In contrast, a more diverse group in West New 
Brighton branch on Staten Island, jettisoned many of the readings as "too heavy 
going" and instead added essays by Ralph Waldo Emerson, Lincoln Steffen's 
Autobiography, various plays, poems, and Manhattan Transfer, a novel by John 
Dos Passos.^' The use of a flexible reading list, democratically selected, includ­
ing popular works as well as classics, became the hallmark of Exploring the 
American Idea groups. The act of reading and discussion became as important 
as the specific selections on democracy; the democratic process undergirded 
consideration of it. 
While adapting the Great Books model to the local library. Exploring the 
American Idea served as the model for a national program of reading and dis­
cussion on the meaning of the American democratic tradition. Historically, li­
braries had acted as cultural agents in local communities. A coincidence of events 
in spring and summer of 1951, however, transformed Exploring the American 
Idea from a local program of the New York Public Library to a national pro­
gram of the American Library Association. Planning its seventy-fifth anniver­
sary, ALA had appointed an anniversary committee, chaired by Ralph Ellsworth, 
librarian of the State University of Iowa, to develop a theme and program. Sens­
ing that the country's perils presented both dangers and opportunities for 
America's libraries, the committee proposed the theme: "The Heritage of th' 
 144 Jean L. Freer 
United States in a Time of Crisis." Ellswori:h was aware of the NYPL program 
and in December 1950 had asked Ralph Beals if he might share the preliminary 
report of the Committee on the American Tradition with his group. He had al­
ready secured $ 10,000 from Gardner Cowles, publisher of Look magazine and a 
major supporter of the Freedom Train and had arranged for Harper and Brothers 
to issue two books on the American heritage theme in October 1951. Journalist 
Gerald W. Johnson was to write a popular volume on six important problems 
facing the nation, while historian Henry Steele Commager was to edit a 
sourcebook of documents. 
Exploring the American Idea had also attracted the attention of C. Scott 
Fletcher, head of the new Fund for Adult Education (FAE). Created by the Ford 
Foundation in its effort to settle its tax status with the Internal Revenue Service, 
the fund had a particular interest in civic and adult education. Working behind 
the scenes with Carl Milam, departing executive director of ALA, and his suc­
cessor John Mackenzie Cory, Fletcher indicated the fund's interest in support­
ing reading and discussion groups modeled on NYPL's fledgling program. On 
July 13, 1951, he informed Cory that the FAE board had formally approved a 
$150,000 grant to ALA for "the promotion and demonstration of adult commu­
nity discussion programs on the American heritage and its contemporary appli­
cation, to be undertaken by means of a continuing program through the agency 
of public libraries."^^ ALA was to coordinate and support local program activi­
ties, select six demonstration areas, conduct a training program, and seek the 
guidance of other national groups. The grant's size, huge compared to other 
foundation support of ALA, and the program's national scope promised a greatly 
expanded audience for the public library as an independent agent of adult edu­
cation. 
Since FAE had specified that ALA base its training and promotional mate­
rials on the New York Public Library experience,^^ New York City was named 
one of the six initial sites along with Athens, Georgia, the state of Vermont, La 
Crosse, Wisconsin, Denver, Colorado, and Los Angeles County, California. In 
October 1951, librarians from the participating libraries attended a week-long 
orientation in New York City where they observed a model group discussion of 
the Declaration of Independence led by Margaret Monroe and Ida Goshkin, head 
of training for the American Heritage Project, and a Great Books group at the 
96th Street branch. 
The American Heritage Project was ALA's first national adult education 
program to be centralized in both theme and implementation. The Great Issues 
program, introduced as part of the Four Year Goals in 1948, had promoted the 
discussion of serious current issues in libraries but went no further than book 
lists on the selected issues, including world government, civil rights, and infla­
tion, programming suggestions, and posters.^"* Although discussion groups were 
suggested, few were organized. Librarians had little support for the effort, and it 
was generally regarded as unsuccessful.^^ In contrast, the American Heritage 
Project provided reading materials through its office in Chicago along with train-
 Exploring the American Idea 145 
Szploring Zk 
tAmeriem Jdea 
1952-1958 
MuouHc'mg 
A reading and dbcuolon program In 
THE NEW YORK PUBUC UMtARY 
Figure 3: As part of the ALA's American Heritage Project, the Exploring the 
American Idea program used the AHP logo of the Statue of Liberty in its pub­
licity materials. "Exploring the American Idea-title page." Courtesy of New York 
Public Library Archives, The New York Public Library, Astor, Lenox and Tilden 
Foundations. 
 146 Jean L. Freer 
ing and follow-up consultation by project staff. Nonetheless, AHP displayed the 
same local autonomy and flexibility that characterized Exploring the American 
Idea. ALA's position that the choice of topics, readings, and pace would be left 
not just to local communities but to individual discussion groups enabled it to 
deflect potential criticism of the project from political conservatives.^^ 
Like its use of the Lilienthal quotation, the program's links to Commager 
and Johnson put the program squarely within the bounds of the liberal demo­
cratic consensus. The format of Commager's Living Ideas in America, with pri­
mary documents grouped around issues appropriate for discussion, allowed 
groups to choose their own topics and readings. Heavy on writings of the Founding 
Fathers and New Dealers, it offered a more diverse array than earlier EAI read­
ings. It included works by African Americans W. E. B. Du Bois and Booker T. 
Washington and suffragists Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony and 
omitted writings by Utopians, anarchists, Wobblies, and union leaders. Excerpts 
by Jane Addams, Catherine Beecher, and Dorothy Canfield Fisher confined 
women's voices to social welfare and education issues. Commager himself was 
on hand at the training institute in New York to discuss the materials.^'' In con­
trast to Commager's selection of primary documents, Gerald W. Johnson's This 
American People presented the view of one writer, an unabashed New Dealer 
and enthusiast of democracy.^^ Written to stimulate discussion, it emphasized 
that hard work and courage were necessary to sustain democracy and was used 
in conjunction with study guides prepared by such groups as the General Fed­
eration of Women's Clubs. 
Discussion groups gave libraries an opportunity to expand their potential as 
agencies of adult education and to enlarge their audience for serious works on 
current issues. In this, both EAI and AHP seemed to fulfill the recommendations 
appearing in the studies of the Public Library Inquiry published by Columbia 
University Press from 1949 to 1951. Finding that only a small fraction of the 
public used the public library and tended to seek popular, ephemeral material, 
the PLI challenged the notion of the library as bulwark of democracy. Libraries, 
they concluded, were limited by the self-selected nature of their audience and 
the emergent competition of the mass media. In light of this, libraries should 
concentrate on reaching local communications elites with serious, controversial 
works of long-lasting interest.^' 
The evolution of Exploring the American Idea, however, suggests that the 
library went beyond this role to reach an expanded audience outside the library. 
The use of new media became crucial to this outreach effort. Based on the Great 
Books model, EAI had not included film in its design, although as early as spring 
1950 NYPL had begun training film discussion leaders and conducting separate 
film discussion series. Nor had the use of film been mentioned in planning the 
American Heritage Project. The Fund for Adult Education had a strong interest 
in film, however, through its president, Scott Fletcher, former head of 
Encyclopaedia Britannica Films, and Grace Stevenson, head of the American 
Heritage Project, a pioneer in the use of films at the Seattie Public Library."*" 
 Exploring the American Idea 147 
Films were an integral part of the American Heritage training session in New 
York in October 1951, with Ida Goshkin showing "Due Process of Law Denied" 
based on The Oxbow Incident and leading discussion on the issues it raised. 
Planned before joining the American Heritage Project, the second year of 
Exploring the American Idea seemed much like the first, but AHP funding 
changed the program's size and composition. The 1951-1952 brochure again 
announced both EAI and Great Books groups and used the same quotation from 
David Lilienthal. EAI expanded to fifteen groups, met at additional branches, 
and used program materials produced by ALA. The major difference lay in the 
addition of film discussion groups in six branches with newly purchased movies 
and equipment.'*' A brochure resembling a piece of film advertised the program 
as: 
A film review of our heritage. An adult discussion series to 
investigate basic principles of our society through motion pic­
tures. At this critical time we seek democratic solutions to 
democracy's problems. Come to your neighborhood branch 
library once in two weeks. 8 P.M. FREE"^ 
Films were central to extending the library's reach.'*'' They promised to 
expand the library's audience but, used without readings, they changed the dy­
namic of group discussion. Film audiences were larger, more anonymous, and 
changed from week to week. They required little or no advance preparation. 
With increased emphasis on group service and the use of films, EAI discussion 
groups moved away from individual interaction with text and small group con­
sideration of them. In extending its reach as an agency of culture, the library 
assumed a new role as adult educator using non-print media but lessened the 
opportunity for individual engagement. Participants became more passive than 
active, the program more entertainment than education. 
At the end of the 1951-52 project year, Mildred Mathews reported overall 
success far exceeding the library's hopes. The flexibility of the program, neces­
sitated by the diversity of the city, was seen as a major strength. Reporting to 
ALA, she described New York as a series of disconnected communities with 
wide variations in racial and economic status that caused tensions as neighbor­
hoods changed. "Any program," she observed, "that is designed for New York 
City (from rural Staten Island, to foodoose central Manhattan, to kaleidoscopic 
Bronx) must be extremely flexible in methods and materials." The program's 
ability to reflect this heterogeneity was a key interest of project staff. In her 
report, Mathews commented. 
The quality and content of the discussion is unusually good. 
This is due not only to the leaders and materials, but also to 
the great variety in the educational, religious, and racial back­
grounds of the participants as well as in their occupations. 
 148 Jean L Freer 
Figure 4: The use of film broadened the audience for library discussion groups. 
"Exploring the American Idea-film discussion groups." Courtesy of New York 
Public Library Archives, The New York Public Library, Astor, Lenox and Tilden 
Foundations. 
 Exploring the American Idea 149 
There are old and new Americans, Puerto Ricans, American 
Negroes, Europeans, lawyers, actors. Clerks, Catholics, Jews 
and Protestants, high school graduates and others with ad­
vanced degrees, young adults and some not so young, etc.'*'* 
Mathews reported that thirteen groups had used the original list from the 
Committee on the American Tradition; one advanced group used a second se­
ries of readings, selected by leaders. Six film discussion groups used different 
combinations of books, films, and pamphlets, each using film in a different 
way. "There has been," she concluded, "no rigid overall pattern." Thus, as the 
group members increasingly made decisions about the topics and works to be 
discussed, the role of the hbrarian as book expert and arbiter of taste was di­
minished in an increasingly democratic selection process. 
While there were quantifiable indicators of success, including an increase 
in the numbers of participants and groups and in the proportion of groups led 
by community volunteers, many benefits were intangible.'*^ Librarians and par­
ticipants profited from enhanced leadership skills, enrichment from sharing ideas 
with others, the opportunity to read new and sometimes challenging works, and 
to meet and work with new people. In addition, the program had given the 
Hbrary greater visibility, attracting non-users and calling the library to the at­
tention of other institutions in the city, including the Board of Education, New 
York University, and the League of Women Voters. Most importantly, the li­
brary had defined itself as a safe place in which important matters could be 
discussed. Mathews reported. 
In this time of increasing tension, loyalty oaths, and fear to 
speak one's mind, many people coming to these American Idea 
groups have exclaimed: " I had no idea we could speak so 
freely! Almost anywhere else it's impossible." The growing 
taboo on the discussion of basic principles of democracy (aris­
ing from a mistaken method of fighting communism) has made 
it socially incorrect in many areas (radio, schools) [and] eco­
nomically unwise to inquire into the basis for our democratic 
govemment. This discussion program makes such inquiry once 
more "respectable", and puts a foot in the door that was gradu­
ally closing. This program, small as it is, has generated a force 
to help stop the development of a dangerous taboo that no 
democracy can afford.'*^ 
In her report on the 1951-52 program year, Mathews noted numerous re­
quests for assistance from organizations wishing to conduct an American Idea 
group,'*'' so while fine-tuning the EAI reading list for 1952-53, and adding a 
new series on the American Character, NYPL staff proposed a greater emphasis 
 150 Jean L. Freer 
on group service. Ralph Beals explained that community organizations would 
benefit from the library's resources and experience while the library could reach 
a larger number of people in this way than it could reach directly with the same 
expenditure.'*^ The library's 1952-53 report to ALA demonstrated the impact of 
these changes on the program's content and reach. The new series on the Ameri­
can Character, including biography, fiction, and films, had proven even more 
popular than the original American Idea series which was also losing ground to 
Great Books. Mildred Mathews observed. 
Great Books is not only a larger established program, but it 
also seems to have a self-improvement or even a "snob ap­
peal" aspect which seems to be lacking in the American Ideas 
series. Perhaps advertising the latter as the Great Books of 
America might have an effect. Numbers of people who come 
to this office to inquire about discussion groups, when pre­
sented witii both programs, choose the Great Books.'*^ 
The most dramatic increases, however, were in film attendance and group 
service. The five film discussion groups at library branches held 42 meetings 
with average attendance of more tiian 21, and, unlike other groups, included 
more men than women. The library also helped community organizations plan 
and conduct their own American Heritage programs. Nine church groups used 
films and pamphlets consistentiy; seven community centers adapted American 
Heritage programs for adult discussion groups; and six homes for the aged had 
begun programs. Overall the library helped plan programs and supplied films 
and materials to 60 organizations and circulated 217 films to audiences totaling 
26,003.^0 
Of particular note was the library's response to the interests of a group of 
elderly Chinese gentlemen. Because they did not speak English, a Chinese as­
sistant from the Chatham Square branch had read to this Golden Age Club each 
week for two years. When die group wanted to know more about America and 
American history, flie Office of Adult Services arranged to show films acquired 
for the American Idea series, including "The Declaration of Independence," 
"America, die Beautiful," "Due Process of Law Denied," and "Grandma Moses," 
With an enrollment of 51, attendance over six meetings totaled 253 and aver­
aged 39. The library's report concluded: 
"Exploring the American Idea in Chinese" has brought library 
service to a group which could not have been reached as ef­
fectively in any other way. Here was an adult group and an 
expressed need, with language and educational barriers to com­
munication. The use of specially selected films and other ma­
terials and the encouragement of free discussion have been 
 Exploring the American Idea 151 
one effective means of meeting The New York Public Library' s 
responsibility to the Chinese community in New York City.̂ ^ 
The use of films and group services as part of the American Idea program 
peaked in 1953-54, the last year in which it received FAE support. While eiu-ollment
in Great Books increased from 411 to 454, participation in the American 
Idea series dechned again, from 344 to 303. Average attendance dropped fi-om 
13.5 to 10. Nonetheless, the library planned another series of readings, focused 
on the American Scene, using novels, drama, and poetry. The audience for films 
provided by the hbrary seemed secure, increasing by 50 percent over the previ­
ous year to 39,994. The number of fihns circulated increased from 217 to 625, 
and the number of groups served up from 60 to 110, nearly exceedmg the hbrary's 
ability to meet the demand.^^ Like the library, these organizations were shortstaffed
and often required more assistance than the library could provide. 
At the same time, many discussion groups turned their attention to affairs in 
their local communities. Early descriptions of the Exploring the American Idea 
stressed that it was a discussion not an action program. But, particularly in the 
film discussion groups, participants moved from talk to action. With themes 
often related to community issues, such as "Who's Delinquent?" on troubled 
youth or "The City" on urban planning, films led to "constractive action for 
neighborhood betterment." Discussion at the Tremont, Bronx, branch, for ex­
ample, prompted creation of a neighborhood committee to get better police and 
sanitation services. Discussion of the film "Our Better Tomorrow" by a group at 
the Morrisania, Bronx, branch, including local PTA members, was credited with 
greater understanding of community school issues. On Staten Island, a film pro­
gram led to the organization of a book discussion group on "Mental Health in 
the Community" led by a local psychiatrist and regional librarian.^^ 
In the postwar world, librarians sought to define the role of public libraries 
in adult education and to respond to die crisis of American democracy posed by 
the Cold War. Exploring the American Idea merged these strands, adapting the 
Great Books model to the public library setting for reading and discussion groups 
on the American democratic tradition. Beginning in New York City and then 
across the nation, the program enabled public libraries to fulfill the role advo­
cated by the Public Library Inquiry, meeting the needs of well-educated and 
serious readers to consider the issues of the day. At the same time, however, the 
format of discussion, involving lay leadership, close reading of the text, and a 
questioning of fundamental ideas, challenged the notion of a fixed set of demo­
cratic values or a widely shared, unaltered consensus. As the program evolved, 
with greater group involvement in the selection of topics and reading and a 
more community and action-oriented focus, the group setting offered an expe­
rience of democracy as well as a consideration of it. The introduction of film 
discussion moved the groups further away from the C^r^at Books model. As 
participation became more anonymous and more passive, the entertainment as-
 152 Jean L. Freer 
pect partly eclipsed the education function. At the same time, however, film 
enabled the library to expand its reach and inspired action among community 
organizations and ethnic groups whose members might never have joined a 
book discussion group or been considered part of a community's educated elite. 
While embodying the postwar notion of democratic consensus; EAI gave scope 
for questioning it. While embodying the Public Library Inquuy vision for pub­
lic library service, EAI provided a way for libraries to extend their reach to the 
broader public beyond their traditional base. 
Notes 
1. Ralph A. Beals and Leon Brody, The Literature of Adult Education (New York, 1941), 
356. 
2. Margaret E. Monroe, Library Adult Education: The Biography of an Idea (New York, 
1963). Monroe provides a history of adult education at the NYPL and observes that even those 
libraries most actively engaged in adult education activities rarely referred to them as such. The 
author wishes to thank Dr. Monroe for reading and commenting on an earlier draft of this article. 
3. Archibald MacLeish, "The Librarian and the Democratic Process," ALA Bulletin 34 (June 
1940): 385-388,421-422; Franklin D. Roosevelt, "A Message to the Sixty-fourth Annual Confer­
ence of the American Library Association, Milwaukee, June 26, 1942," ALA Bulletin 36 (July 
1942): [422] 
4. "Libraries and the War," ALA Bulletin 36 (January 1942): 3-5. A statement adopted 
unanimously by the Council of the American Library Association on December 29, 1941 read, 
"Every library must organize its services and expenditures without delay to meet the necessities 
of a nation at war. Every library activity must stand a triple scrutiny. Will it contribute to victory? 
Will it help to make a better America? Will it help to make a better world?" 
5. "The Library Demonstration Bill," ALA Bulletin 40 (May 1946): 157-159; Emily Taft 
Douglas, "Rural Libraries in America," ALA Bulletin 40 (September 1946): 269-272 [address to 
Second General Session, American Library Association annual conference, Buffalo, June 18,1946]. 
6. For an extended discussion, see Douglas Raber, Librarianship and Legitimacy: The Ide­
ology of the Public Library Inquiry (Westport, Conn., 1997). 
7. Leslie I. Poste, "The Public Library Inquiry," Library Journal 74 (1 September 1949): 
1162. r8.
Emily Miller Danton, "Putilic Library War Information Centers," ALA Bulletin 36 (Au­
gust 1942): 501; Ralph A. Beals, "PUpc Libraries and the War," ALA Bulletin 36 (August 1942): 
476-479; "Chairmen of ALA War Sefvice Committees," ALA Bulletin 36 (April 1942): 230. For 
further biographical information on B^alg, see Jesse Shera, "Beals, Ralph Albert (1899-1954)," in 
Dictionary of American Library Biography (Littleton, Colo., 1978), 17-20. 
9. "Chicago University Experiment Develops into Great Books Foundation," Library Jour­
nal 72 (15 June 1947): 916. 
10. "Richmond Conference," Library Journal 61 (15 June 1936): 491. Minutes of the Order 
and Book Selection Round Table reported by W T. Purdum, Secretary. 
11. "The New York Public Library Launches Great Books Program," Library Journal 72 (1 
September 1947): 1174. Beals claimed that the first Great Books discussion in a library was held 
at the New York Public shortly after John Erskine first taught his course on Classics of the Western 
World at Columbia University. ^ 
12. "Groups Discussion of Great Books on Basic Problems 1949-1950: Aimouncing a Read­
ing and Discussion Program in the New York Public Library," NYPL Archives, RG 6 Public Rela­
tions, Pro Samples 19494:95-1^[hereafter Pro Samples]. 
13. James Gregory Bradis&er,^Taking America's Heritage to the People: The Freedom Train 
Story," Prologue 17.4 (1985): 259%45', Stuart J. Little, "The Freedom Train: Citizenship and Post 
War Pohtical Culture 1946-1949," Artierie^n Studies 34 (Spring 1993): 35-68. 
14. "The Freedom Train Leads to the Libfary,^^brochure] Pro Samples 1949-1951. 
15. "The American Tradition; Letters and Documents Selected by the Staff of the Manu­
script Division," Branch Library Book News 26.2-3 (1949): 43-48. 
16. Pro Samples 1949-1951, RG 6 /3-4. 
17. Margaret E. Monroe, "Exploring the American Mind," Branch Library Book News 26.23
(1949): 39-40,50-53. Monroe began her essay with the central question being debated by schol­
ars in the newly developing interdisciplinary field of American studies: 
 Exploring the American Idea 153 
Three hundred years of blending peoples and cultures have produced a unique 
character in the American people. Europeans, Orientals, South Americans 
look curiously at the United States to see what makes it a nation. And we, 
inquisitively and sometimes self-consciously, search out the essential forms 
that are American, the molding forces that make us a people distinct from 
other peoples. 
For a look at how ideological issues afftected the development of American Studies at Yale and 
elsewhere, see Michael Holzman, "The Ideological Origins of American Studies at Yale," Ameri­
can Studies 40 (Summer 1999): 71-99. 
18. The library's Honor Roll of Race Relations honored African Americans and whites each 
year who had contributed to the betterment of race relations in America. 
19. Katherine O'Brien, "American Historical Novels," Branch Library Book News 26.2-3 
(1949): 41-42, 53. 
20. Marion E. Lang, "The Distaff Side of American History," Branch Library Book News 
26.2-3 (1949): 49. 
21. Memorandum to Branch Librarians from Esther Johnston, Supervisor of Branches, 6 
December 1946, NYPL Archives, RG 8 Office of Branch Libraries, Memo Scrapbook 1946. The 
case, Doubleday & Co. v. New York, 335 U.S. 848 (1948), began when four plainclothes police, 
acting on a tip from the New York Society for the Suppression of Vice, raided four Doubleday 
Book Shops in Manhattan. The Court of Special Sessions of the City of New York found that the 
book violated the New York State obscenity statute. The Appellate Division of the New York 
Supreme Court, the New York Court of Appeals, and the Supreme Court of the United States 
upheld this decision. The beginning and end of the saga are reported at "Police Here Seize Book 
as Obscene; 4 Doubleday Shops Entered in Vice Society's Action against 'Memoirs of Hecate 
County'," New YorkTimes, 9 July 1946,19; "High Court Backs New York Book Ban; State Ruling 
Is Upheld on the Obscenity of 'Memoirs of Hecate County'," New York Times, 26 October 1948, 
33. Announced without an opinion, the Supreme Court's 4 to 4 tie vote let stand the state court 
conviction. 
22. David K. Beminghausen, "Ban of the Nation," Wilson Library Bulletin 23 (September 
1948): 20-21; David K. Beminghausen, "The Case of the Nation," The American Scholar 19 
(January 1950): 44-55. 
23. Benjamin Fine, "Library Association Asks Support for Fight against Various Forms of 
Censorship," New York Times, 20 June 1948, sec. 4, p. 9; "Library Bill of Rights," ALA Bulletin 42 
(July-August 1948): 285. For a history of ALA's policy on intellectual freedom during this period, 
see Louise S. Robbins, Censorship arid the American Library: The American Library Association's 
Response to Threats to Intellectual Freedom (Westport, Conn., 1996). 
24. Mildred V. D. Mathews, "Exploring the American Idea," Library Journal 76 (1951): 
985. 
25. Preliminary Report, Committee on American Tradition, NYPL Archives, RG 6 Director's 
Office, CD American Heritage, Box 30. [Hereafter CD American Heritage] The committee name 
varied from American tradition to American idea or heritage. In addition to Mildred Mathews, 
committee members included Robert Henderson, chief of the Main Reading Room, Loda Hopkins, 
librarian of the 96th Street Branch, Gerald McDonald, head of the American History Division, 
and Lilian Wilson, librarian of the Bronx Reference Center. 
26. Report, Committee on American Tradition. 3 May 1950, CD American Heritage. 
27. The brochure announcing the fall 1950 organization of experimental reading and dis­
cussion groups on the theme of "Exploring the American Idea" included a partial list of readings. 
Before publishing the final list, Beals hoped to convene a symposium of outside lay people and 
library staff for a general review of the projected program. Declining Mathews's suggestion that 
he approve the titles, he wrote, "A determination of ihe list should rest primarily in the hands of 
your committee not mine." Although Beals and Mathews each suggested possible participants, 
including Judge Learned Hand and Saturday Review editor Norman Cousins, and Beals drafted an 
invitation, the symposium was not convened. Mathews to Beals, 19 June 1950, CD American 
Heritage; "Draft of Letter to Be Sent to Persons on Attached List," Ralph A. Beals, Director, CD 
American Heritage. A penciled note indicates "not sent." The program went ahead relying on the 
experience of the library in group reading and discussion and the judgment of its librarians on 
appropriate readings. While such an outside group might have warned against undertaking such a 
program in the chilling political climate, it might have also questioned the omission of any works 
by women or African Americans from the proposed reading list. 
28. "Group Discussion of Books 1950-1951" [Brochure] Pro Samples 1949-1951. 
29. CD American Heritage, [Exploring the American Idea 1950-51 Table of Contents, List 
of Readings, Discussion Guide]. See also, "The Library Leads to Learning," Branch Library Book 
News 27.7 (September 1950): 91. 
30. "Group Discussion of Books 1950-51." 
 154 Jean L. Freer 
31. Mathews, "Exploring the American Idea," 987-988. 
32. Fletcher to Cory, 13 M y 1951,American Library Association Archives, Executive Board 
and Executive Director, Grace T. Stevenson Papers, 2/4/21, Box 1, University of Illinois. [Hereaf­
ter ALA Archives 2/4/21 ] 
33. Ibid. Interestingly, given the origin of the NYPL project, Ralph Ellsworth strongly op­
posed the Great Books method, writing in a marginal note on a copy of Fletcher's letter, "Stay 
away from Great Books technique—Ellsworth." 
34. "Four Year Goals; Statement of Policy Adopted by Council, January 31, 1948," ALA 
Bulletin 42 (March 1948): 121-122. "The Great Issues," The Booklist 44 (August 1948): 397-422. 
Book lists included: "How Much World Government?" "Inflation and Deflation," "Labor-Man­
agement Relations," "Civil Rights," and "U.S.-Russian Relations." The list on U.S.-Russian Rela­
tions was prepared by Dr. Avrahm Yarmolinsky, Chief of the Slavonic Division, and Margaret E. 
Monroe, Assistant Readers' Adviser, at the New York Public Library. 
35. For Lester Asheim's evaluation, see "Response to the Great Issues Program," ALA Bul­
letin 44 (July-August 1950): 285-289. 
36. Grace Thomas Stevenson, "ALA American Heritage Project Report to Council," Janu­
ary 1952, ALA Archives, 2/4/21, American Heritage Project Reports 1951-1955. 
37. Henry Steele Commager, ed. Living Ideas in America, (New York, 1951). Ellsworth had 
resisted Harper's choice of Commager as editor, but his book proved useful, and Commager be­
came an active participant in the American Heritage Project. Margaret Monroe reported that when 
Senator Joseph McCarthy charged that Commager was a Communist, ALA dealt with these "star­
tling defamations" by ignoring them. Neil Jumonville's intellectual history of Commager, Henry 
Steele Commager: Midcentury Liberalism and the History of the Present, (Chapel Hill, 1999) 
does not mention Commager's connection with the American Heritage Project. 
38. Gerald W. Johnson, This American People (New York, 1951). 
39. The volumes making this case most strongly were Bernard Berelson, The Library's Public 
(New York, 1949) and the Inquiry's summary volume, Robert D. Leigh, The Public Library in the 
United States: The General Report of the Public Library Inquiry (New York, 1950). 
40. Benjamin Fine, "Education in Review: Film Discussion Groups Are Carrying Out a 
Novel Experiment in Adult Education, New York Times, 30 March 1952, sec. 4, p. 11. In 1951 the 
Fund also sponsored the Experimental Film Discussion Project to test films, along with specially 
prepared essays and guides, as the basis of adult discussion groups. Some libraries participated in 
this film project, using Encyclopaedia Britannica films on "American Statesmen" to discuss the 
theme "Great Men and Great Issues in Our American Heritage." 
41. "Group Discussion of Books 1951-1952. Announcing Reading and Discussion Programs 
in The New York Public Library." Pro Samples 1949-1951. 
42. Pro Samples, 1949-1952. 
43. Cory to Clift, 29 August 1952, CD American Heritage. American Heritage Funds also 
enabled NYPL to undertake its first public circulation of films, although necessarily limited for 
the present to films on American heritage themes. 
44. Report 1951-1952 [responding to undated memorandum to all supervisors of American 
Heritage Programs from Grace Stevenson], NYPL Archives, RG 8 Branch Libraries, Office of 
Adult Services, Annual/Monthly Reports, 1951-52. [Hereafter cited, Office of Adult Services, 
Report 1951-52] 
45. Annual Report Readers' Adviser's Office and Office of Adult Services, July 1, 1952June
30,1953 [Submitted by Mildred V. D. Mathews, Superintendent of Adult Services, dated 24 
June 1953], Office of Adult Services. [Hereafter Office of Adult Services, Annual Report 195253]
46. Ibid., Insertion, 8. 
47. Office of Aduh Services, Annual Report 1951-52, 4. 
48. Beals to CUft, 26 May 1952, CD American Heritage. 
49. Ibid., 4. 
50. Ofificeof Adult Services, Annual Report, 1952-53. 
51. "Exploring the American Idea in Chinese," Office of Adult Services, Annual Report 
1952-53. 
52. The New York Public Library Adult Group Specialist Report 1953-1954, Office of Adult 
Services. 
53. Ibid., 2. 
