SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015
www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/
doi:10.5194/soil-1-543-2015
© Author(s) 2015. CC Attribution 3.0 License.
SOIL
Case studies of soil in art
C. Feller1, E. R. Landa2, A. Toland3, and G. Wessolek3
1Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), 28 rue Dr Blanchard, 30700 Uzès, France
2Department of Environmental Science and Technology, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD 20742, USA
3Department of Soil Protection, Institute for Ecology, Technische Universität Berlin, Ernst Reuter Platz 1,
10587 Berlin, Germany
Correspondence to: C. Feller (christian.feller@ird.fr)
Received: 14 August 2014 – Published in SOIL Discuss.: 9 February 2015
Revised: 9 June 2015 – Accepted: 16 July 2015 – Published: 13 August 2015
Abstract. The material and symbolic appropriations of soil in artworks are numerous and diverse, spanning
many centuries and artistic traditions, from prehistoric painting and ceramics to early Renaissance works in
Western literature, poetry, paintings, and sculpture, to recent developments in film, architecture, and contemporary
art. Case studies focused on painting, installation, and film are presented with the view of encouraging
further exploration of art about, in, and with soil as a contribution to raising soil awareness.
1 Introduction
Soil is a word whose meaning varies according to context.
The patriotic understanding of soil (as in the “soil of France”)
and the agricultural understanding of soil have very little in
common. Even in the environmental and geological sciences,
there are often vast differences between the soil of the geologist,
the archaeologist, the geotechnical engineer, and the soil
scientist, or pedologist. In the history of soil science, numerous
definitions have been formulated, but all tend to have one
or more of the following criteria in common: the presence of,
or ability to sustain, life; the state and position of the soil as
unconsolidated porous matter occupying the topmost layer
of the earth, from the surface to the parent rock below; and
the ability to demonstrate a record of physical and chemical
change (genesis) due to myriad environmental factors over
time (Certini and Ugolini, 2013).
Until now, no other planet has been identified with such a
substrate fulfilling these criteria. The Earth’s soil is unique
in our universe, and yet represents a presence in daily life
so common that it is taken for granted. For the non-scientific
public at large, soil is mainly the surface on which we walk,
or an obscure part of the larger landscape. Because of its
life-giving sustenance for all humans and other living beings,
soils are far too important to be studied by soil scien-
tists alone. But we live in a world where disciplinary boundaries
define our work. Within the realm of science, bound-
ary crossings – or what Julie Thompson Klein (1990, p. 65)
refers to as “border disciplinarity” – are typically of the
nearest-neighbor type: i.e., biology + chemistry = biochemistry,
or geology and physics = geophysics. Extensions of
soil science outside the agricultural or earth sciences, to the
arts and humanities, are far less frequent. The last decades
show, however, that the activities of the soil science community
and its traditional partners have been insufficient in pro-
tecting our soils and landscapes. Soil degradation due to poor
agricultural practice and lack of regulation and soil loss due
to sealing and urban sprawl continue to occur at an alarming
rate.
To encourage more holistic approaches to soil protection,
our soil science community must open the doors to develop
new perspectives by investigating and initiating transdisciplinary
projects. Art, history, anthropology, sociology, psy-
chology, economics, and religious studies represent just a
few fields for expanding the scope of soil protection and raising
soil awareness. In this contribution we aim to show how
artists help reveal the interconnectivity of soil, life, and culture,
and in so doing offer a different lens for appreciating
the soil.
The range of art forms and genres dealing with soil is wide
and diverse, spanning many centuries and artistic traditions,
Published by Copernicus Publications on behalf of the European Geosciences Union.
 544 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art
from prehistoric painting and ceramics to early Renaissance
works in Western paintings and sculpture, to recent developments
in film, architecture, and contemporary art (Landa
and Feller, 2010; Toland and Wessolek, 2010, 2014). With
the emergence of environmental awareness and activism during
the second part of 20th century, especially since the
Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, individual artists
all around the world began to include soil (and not simply
the landscape in general) as a subject of artistic inquiry. Environmental
art, ecological art, and Land Art are some of the
more well-known genres that took up issues of land use, soil
ecology, and agricultural change in the latter half of the 20th
century.
Following Wessolek’s (2002) personal vision “to encourage
a new art style, named Soil Art”, we have assembled a
set of case studies that we feel expose the possibilities of this
vision. For our purposes of case selection, we will define soil
art as “artistic work about, in, or with soil or soil protection
issues, that is produced by artists in a multitude of genres
and media, to be understood, among other things, as artwork
that may contribute to wider environmental and soil protection
and awareness-raising discourses” (adapted from Toland
and Wessolek, 2010). This definition does not presume the
recognition of a new art genre but rather narrows our field of
inquiry and opens the door for future discussion.
Since the scope of artistic activity with and about soil is
so large and diverse, it will be impossible to give examples
of all artistic forms and genres in a single article. Rather than
attempt a comprehensive overview, we will offer selected examples,
from Renaissance paintings to contemporary instal-
lation works, to feature films, which reflect our observations
as soil scientists with focused interests in art:
– Sect. 2 (painting) by C. Feller, with additions by
A. Toland and G. Wessolek;
– Sect. 3 (installation) by A. Toland and G. Wessolek;
– Sect. 4 (film) by E. R. Landa.
2 Painting
2.1 Roots, resurrection, and rural life – examples from
the Renaissance
Examples of soil in paintings are numerous and date to
antiquity. On the one hand, there is soil as the medium
itself; soils have been used as a material for art as pigments
(since the prehistoric wall paintings in caves) (Ugolini,
2010), and more recently in contemporary paintings to give
special effects to the subject (Van Breemen, 2010). On the
other hand, soil has been represented in paintings and mosaics
in the form of lines or surfaces as an element of the
landscape. In some cases, it was a schematic representation,
as if the artist appeared to have consciously failed to
observe the soil (Feller et al., 2010), as in Venus Standing
in a Landscape (see http://www.louvre.fr/oeuvre-notices/
venus-debout-dans-un-paysage).
But in other cases, the depiction of the soil (as a surface or
a soil profile in the paintings) is remarkable, even when the
focus is on another subject. Feller et al. (2010) distinguish
three motifs of soil profile representation in paintings from
the Renaissance:
i. Visualization of the soil profile for the resurrection of
the dead
In The Last Judgment by Rogier Van der Weyden (1432)
(Fig. 1), the resurrection of the dead required the artist
to show the soil profile. The complete painting exhibits
numerous soil profiles. Details of the emergence of men
and women from soil profiles (lower part of the painting)
are so true to reality that they might have been
painted by a pedologist.
ii. Visualization of the soil profile for displaying plant
roots
In several Renaissance paintings, the representation of a
ditch or a soil cut in a painting served very often as an
opportunity to picture roots. In St. John the Baptist by
Hieronymus Bosch (1450–1516), the figure of St. John
leans towards a sharp vertical exposure of soil that includes
a strange large root: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
St._John_the_Baptist_in_the_Wilderness).
A large root also appears in The Tempest, painted
by Giorgione (1477/78–1510) (http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/The_Tempest_(Giorgione)).
These works are just two examples of paintings in which
large, forked roots were made evident. The representation
of roots was not due to chance, but was chosen
for its symbolic value. The root presented in detail in
the foreground of the St. John the Baptist painted by
Bosch is most likely the mandragora root, as suggested
by Marjnissen and Ruyffelaere (1987). The mandragora
root is thick, hairy and forked, and in a humanoid form.
The roots of the Mandragora genus (mandrake) were
extensively used by alchemists and in magic rituals
based on their psychotropic properties (see Feller et al.,
2010, p. 12, Fig. 1.6).1The mandrake was also a religious
symbol for Christians, for whom it was linked to
Genesis and aspects of Christ’s life (for further details,
see Feller et al., 2010).
iii. Visualization of the soil profile to depict rural life and
agricultural practices
1To view images of mandragora, (1) go to http://mandragore.
bnf.fr/jsp/rechercheExperte.jsp; (2) click on “Département des
Manuscrits (occidentaux)”; (3) at “Cote”, enter “français 12322”;
(4) click on “Les images numérisées”; (5) at “Folio” box, enter
“180v”; (6) hit “Chercher”, then click on the individual images to
view.
SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015 www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/
 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art 545
Figures for article “Case studies of soil in art”  
Authors: Feller C., Landa Edward R., Toland A., Wessolek G.  
 
  
Figure 01. Details of Le Jugement Dernier (The Last Jugement), circa 1432, Van der Weyden 
R., Musée Hôtel-Dieu, Hospices Civils de Beaune, Beaune, France (© Hospices de Beaune). 
 
 
 
Figure 1. R. Van der Weyden. Details of Le Jugement Dernier (The Last Judgment). Circa 1432. Musée Hôtel-Dieu, Hospices Civils de
Beaune, Beaune, France (© Hospices de Beaune).
In the 14th and 15th centuries artists also turned their
gaze towards the soil in their depiction of agricultural
practices. In the Très Riches Heures,2 for example, we
see representations of specific agricultural tasks and
toils. Here, the soil is depicted with a clear concern of
realism and technical specificity, including the tilling of
the soil. Herein is an early artistic and technical representation
of what agronomists and pedologists describe
as an agricultural profile. In addition to this example,
Peter Brueghel the Elder (1525/30–1569) might also be
cited for The Fall of Icarus (Fig. 2). Icarus is the tiny figure
at the bottom in the right-hand corner, with only his
legs visible as he descends into the sea, while in forefront
of the canvas, attention is centered on the good
Flemish ploughman tilling furrows. That was the triumph
of daily working life over Utopia (“falling from
the sky”). Besides the ploughman serving as a reference
for agriculture, Brueghel the Elder did not fail to symbolize
other of the world’s riches – animal husbandry
in the form of the sheepherder leaning on his staff, and
the wealth of the sea shown in the form of a busy fisherman.
It should be also noticed that forked roots are
included in the agricultural profile – perhaps meant to
be mandrake.
2The Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry, or Très Riches
Heures, is the most famous example of French Gothic manuscript
illumination. It is a book of hours: a collection of prayers to be said
at the canonical hours. It was created between ca. 1412 and 1416 for
the Duke of Berry by the Limbourg brothers. The “calendar” images
are vivid representations of peasants performing agricultural work.
2.2 Abstraction, experience, and inspiration – examples
from the 20th century
Our next two examples stem from two very different and opposed
artistic traditions of the 20th century: European ab-
stract painting and American regionalism, which favored realistic
representation over abstraction.
2.2.1 Grant Wood (USA)
Art critics such as John Arthur (2000) and Lauren Della
Monica (2013) have described realism in landscape painting
as an ongoing tradition in American art, suggesting that
our understandings and relationships with the land are embedded
in the American cultural experience, as depicted by
19th century painters such as Frederic Church and Winslow
Homer, and later by, for example, Georgia O’Keefe and Alex
Katz. One of the most well-known proponents of American
landscape painting was Grant DeVolson Wood (1891–1942).
He is best known for his paintings depicting the rural American
Midwest, particularly the painting American Gothic, an
iconic image of the 20th century (http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Grant_Wood).
Arbor Day (1932) is well known to soil scientists
around the world (see http://www.wikiart.org/en/
grant-wood/arbor-day-1932).
Arbor Day (from the Latin arbor, meaning tree) is a holiday
in which individuals and groups are encouraged to plant
and care for trees. Years before the creation of the first World
Soil Day on 5 December 2012, the first Arbor Day, held in
the state of Nebraska on 10 April 1872, could also be seen
as a day to celebrate the soil. While the founder of Arbor
Day, J. Sterling Morton, went on to become the Secretary of
www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/ SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015
 546 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art
 
Figure 2. P. I. Bruegel. La chute d’Icare (The Fall of Icarus). Circa 1568. Musées Royaux des Beaux-Arts de Belgique, Brussels, Belgium
(Inv. 4030). Photo: RoScan, J. Geleyns (© Musées Royaux des Beaux-Arts de Belgique, Brussels, Belgium).
Agriculture of the United States (1893–1897), the connection
between this American traditional and its agricultural context
is evident in Grant Wood’s painting, as the schematization of
soil horizons is equally as prominent as the planting of the
tree. This contrast between the title and the obvious attention
to the soilscape below the main subject (the tree planting) is
interesting to consider. It reminds one of the Brueghel painting
The Fall of Icarus, discussed above, where the main sub-
ject was not Icarus, who is quite invisible, but rather a Flemish
ploughman tilling the soil. In both examples, the soil and
its horizons provide for a richer visual narrative that links
cultural tradition and working practices to the soil below.
2.2.2 Jean Dubuffet (France)
While painters of genres past used their medium to document
specific land formations and land use practices (Van
Breemen, 2010; Zika, 2001; Feller et al., 2010), painters of
the European Abstract tradition used soil materials more abstractly
to explore the physical qualities of a given place
rather than to realistically represent it. This turn towards abstract
painting must be understood as a backlash against es-
tablished norms of visual expression dominant in the 19th
century salons. With regard to the soil, the Texturology series
of works by the French modernist painter Jean Dubuffet
(1901–1985) is perhaps the most famous example of what
art historian Grant Kester (2011) has described as the “turn
towards abstraction”. At the height of action painting and
abstract expressionism most notably characterized by artists
such as Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning, Dubuffet
began using a plastering technique called the “Tyrolean”
method in the early 1950s to create large-format paintings
celebrating the complexity of the soil (Alley, 1981).
Dubuffet discovered he could do splendid paintings using
the soil from his garden (Fig. 3). About his series
Topographies or Texturologies or Materiologies, he wrote
(15 April 1958) to his friend Henri Matisse (Dubuffet, Catalogue
Gianadda, 1993, p. 104):
J’entends par là une nouvelle série de ‘tableaux
d’assemblages’ représentant des morceaux de sols.
(I mean by that a new series of paintings representing
an assemblage of pieces of soils.)
While other painters before 1970 used soil as a material or
represented soil as a background feature, it was rare for soil
to be central and presented in and of itself, as with the work
of Jean Dubuffet. Between 1950 and 1960, Dubuffet’s paintings
even carried “pedological” titles, such as the following:
– Terre mon biscuit (Earth, my biscuit). April 1953.
– Terre orange aux trois hommes (Orange earth with three
men). May 1953.
– Histologie du sol (Histology of soil). October 1957.
– Série Texturologie (Texturology series). 1957–1958.
– Mécanique du sol Texturologie (Mechanics of soil texturology).
December 1958.
SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015 www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/
 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art 547
  
 
Figure 3. Jean Dubuffet with soil (1958) (© Archives Fondation Dubuffet, Paris; photo: Jean Weber and © Fondation Gianadda, Martigny).
– Topographie honneur au sol (Topography in honor of
soil). December 1958.
– Terre mère (Mother Earth). December 1959–May 1960.
2.2.3 Anselm Kiefer (Germany)
In addition to works by Joseph Beuys, Hans Haacke, and
Herman Prigann, Anselm Kiefer (1945–) is one of the most
prominent German artists of 21st century to directly use and
depict the soil as an artistic expression of political critique.
Until recent years, Kiefer lived for part of the year in Barjac
in the south of France (Gard) in a vast domain of “garrigue”
(a type of low, soft-leaved scrubland in the Mediterranean
woodlands) that he transformed into a huge work of art: a
concrete architectural landscape with buildings and towers
in ruins, a cathedral of soil and concrete, and a network
of tunnels that evokes the landscape in the scale of giant
earthworm galleries giving access to small houses as art
chapels showing very large paintings or other art works.
These cultivated landscapes have been created with mixed
materials including soil, but also with reinforced concrete,
as in the 2004 giant art work Von den Verlorenen gerührt,
die der Glaube nicht trug, erwachen die Trommeln im
Fluss at the Art Gallery of New South Wales (Sydney,
Australia) (http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/exhibitions/
new-contemporary-galleries/featured-artists-and-works/
anselm-kiefer).
It seems that this artist has developed a special relationship
with soil: in architecture, with digging the soil in the manner
of an earthworm; in painting, with the representation of soil
landscape. Some of these paintings (as in many others by
Kiefer in various museum and private collections around the
world) show cultivated fields which could have caught on fire
– a vision of devastation. It looks dry and bare, but some of
these paintings exhibit a glimmer of hope as Aperiatur Terra
et Germinet Salvatorem (Let the earth be opened and send
forth a savior) (2005–2006). The painting was done with oil,
acrylic, emulsion, shellac, and clay on canvas with colored
www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/ SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015
 548 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art 
 
 
Figure 4. Anselm Kiefer. Aperiatur Terra et Germinet Salvatorem. 2005–2006. (© Anselm Kiefer, courtesy of the artist.)
flowers gathered at the bottom evocating the new birth of life
(Fig. 4).
2.3 Teaching the soil – a place for painting in the soil
science curricula
One of the main objectives of teaching soil science is to convey
the concept of a three-dimensional, organized natural
body – the pedosphere. Soil is organized into different layers
named “horizons”, and the whole of the horizons is the “soil
profile” (Fig. 5), with a thickness from some centimeters to
more than 10 m.
It means that soil is not only “earth” but a “natural body”
dependent upon different factors, such as climate, topography,
geology, biology (including human activities), and time.
Hence, earth as a material (and Earth as a planet) must not
be equated with soil as an organized natural body. This vision
of the soil is attributed to the Russian scientist Vasil-
lii Dokuchaev, who suggested in his 1883 thesis The Russian
Chernozem that the soil be considered the fourth natu-
ral kingdom of nature, equivalent to the mineral, animal, and
vegetable kingdoms.
Every soil scientist knows how students are astonished and
fascinated when they discover the soil profile (Hartemink et
al., 2014). A new world appears for them with this organization
of multi-colored horizons – a world filled with living
creatures. For some, the first time seeing a soil profile can
be an emotional experience. As Hartemink (2014) noted at
the 20th World Congress of Soil Science, “The soil profile
speaks to us. . . . The soil profile tells us stories”. Nowadays,
in modern soil textbooks, soil profiles are shown and described
with photographs. But the early scientific depictions
of soil in paintings dated from the beginning of the 20th century,
either as splendid illustrations in textbooks on soil or
prepared for educational exhibitions in lecture halls, generally
as canvases representing different types of soil (Fig. 6).
The two oil canvases (60× 100 cm) shown in Fig. 6 represent
soil profiles. These canvases were published as il-
lustrations in the soil science textbook of Demolon (1952,
p. 86) and were anonymously displayed in the 1940s for a
soil science course. In an art exhibition on “the Earth” (2005,
Uzès, France), C. Feller presented these paintings, without
any technical explanation. The visitors generally found these
canvases splendid, and asked if they were painted by an artist.
Soil scientists who have written about historical farming
practices, land use, and soil geomorphologic processes have
often referenced paintings such as those discussed in this
chapter, as well as others by Jacob and Salomon van Ruysdael,
Paul Gauguin, Hieronymus Bosch, Peter Brueghel the
Elder, and Ambrogio Lorenzetti, in their communications
(Feller et al., 2010; Hartemink, 2009; Jenny, 1968). They use
artistic examples to make the story of the soil profile come
alive.
Other soil scientists – for example Gerd Wessolek and
Alexandra Toland (Technische Universität Berlin), Ken van
Rees (University of Saskatchewan), and Jay Stratton Noller
(Oregon State University), and Folkert Van Oort and Bénédicte
and Louis-Marie Bresson (INRA, France) – go beyond
showing famous case studies of paintings to include artistic
techniques and artistic collaborations in their teaching practices.
A transdisciplinary confluence of soil science and art is
achieved by including soil science students in artistic activities,
and inviting artists to participate in soil science research
and teaching endeavors.
Paintings by soil scientists are a way of presenting soil
scientific concepts in a visual way. Figure 7 explores formal
aesthetic features (color, texture, structure, composition of
horizons) to describe soil properties. Such aesthetic features
are often used in field descriptions for soil mapping but are
not referred to as such. Capturing the profile in a painting is
an exercise in aesthetic observation and documentation that
allows the field scientist or student to capture subtle details
not possible in tabular, written form.
Painting techniques are also often used in soil awarenessraising
activities, such as the “Painting with the colours of
SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015 www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/
 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art 549 
   
 
 
Figure 5. Soil profiles and associated vegetation represented as paintings in Walter Kubiena’s textbook (1953) Bestimmungsbuch und Systematik
der Böden Europas (The Soils of Europe)
the earth” program with Irena Racek in Austria (Szlezak,
2009), the soil painting program at the Museu de Ciências
da Terra Alexis Dorofeef (Earth Science Museum) in Brazil
(Muggler, 2013), or the soil painting exercises with Marcela
Moraga at the Global Soil Week in 2015. Beginning with
Wessolek’s international “art and soil” calendar in 2004, the
calendar has become a popular format for displaying soils
from an aesthetic perspective. Since that time, several soil
science societies have developed similar calendars as an effort
to raise soil awareness. These examples aim to encour-
age a direct physical, personal, and aesthetic experience with
materials otherwise rarely seen.
3 Installation
Installation art provides artists with unlimited media and
tools with which to explore the soil as social, ecological, and
political subject. This is not to say that more traditional forms
such as painting and sculpture are not sufficient to capture
the complexity of the soil, but that installation introduces
dimensions of time, space, and sensory experience beyond
traditional fields of vision. “By inviting the viewer literally
to enter into the work of art, and by appealing not only to
the sense of sight but also, on occasion, to those of hearing
and smell, such works demand the spectator’s active engagement”
(Grove Art Online, 2009). Rosenthal (2003) catego-
rized installation art into two main groups – filled-space installation,
and site-specific installation, to which many exam-
ples of land art and public outdoor interventions with soil belong.
We will focus on the “filled-space” type of installation
art here, and differentiate between two directions: (i) installation
as an immersive spatial experience that relies heavily
on architectural design, and (ii) installation as Gesamtkunstwerk,
3 or an assemblage of multiple forms that symbolically,
materially, or thematically relate to one another concerning
the values and functions of soil in society.
3.1 Immersive experience
3.1.1 Walter de Maria (USA) and Urs Fischer
(Switzerland)
To begin with the first type of installation, installation as immersive
experience, we can think about the soil in terms of its
3The term Gesamtkunstwerk was first introduced by the
philosopher Karl Friedrich Eusebius Trahndorff in an essay
from 1827 and later popularized by Richard Wagner to describe
the use of multiple art forms in his operas. Although
the term has been hotly debated by art history scholars regarding
works from the Modernist period to the neo-avant-garde
movements of the 1960s, it may be used to interpret installation
art as a work of art consisting of many related parts.
www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/ SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015
 550 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art
     
Figure 6. Unknown artist. Paintings of soil profiles used by A. Demolon and colleagues for their lectures in Paris (in the 1940s). Left:
“Vertisol” from the Centre region (Clermont-Ferrand, France); right: “Luvisol” from the Île-de-France region (Versailles, France) (private
collection).
unique spatial qualities. On the one hand, soil is solid ground
– a dense, stable, immobile field upon which to walk, stand,
and build. On the other hand, soil is a porous zone in perpetual
flux – a complex labyrinth of moist pore spaces and
crevices churning with microscopic life. Regarding the first
vision of the soil, we can cite two well-known examples from
New York City: Walter de Maria’s New York Earth Room
(1977, Fig. 8) and Urs Fischer’s You (2007, Fig. 9). For the
New York Earth Room, the pioneering land artist, Walter de
Maria, filled an entire Manhattan loft with soil from a Pennsylvania
farm, only to be viewed (and smelled) through a
small doorway blocked off by a Plexiglas window. The installation
of earth materials completely occupies the viewers’
experience, bringing the physical, visual awe of land art into
a familiar, indoor, architectural space.
By filling a loft space in Manhattan with earth,
De Maria makes a theatrical use of space. It is the
space itself, which is being shown, transformed by
both the quantity and nature of the material. . . . A
sense of exclusion is experienced by the viewer, as
the space occupied by the work cannot be entered
(Kastner and Wallis, 1998).
Thirty years later and only ten blocks away, Swiss artist
Urs Fischer “installed” a formal antithesis of de Maria’s
Earth Room by excavating rather than depositing about the
same amount of earth from the depths of Gavin Brown’s
gallery floor and inviting the viewer to actually enter into the
work of art at his or her own risk.
Here too, the viewer is overwhelmed by the earth materials
that challenge the architecture of the exhibition space. The
solid ground necessary for any architectural venture gives
way to a new and somewhat ungrounding spatial experience.
In Earth Room and You, typical conceptions of earth materials,
such as ploughed fields or excavated pits for construction
work, are brought indoors to disrupt the viewers’ normal relationship
to the materials and the space they occupy, calling
for deeper contemplation of and confrontation with both.
SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015 www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/
 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art 551 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. G. Wessolek. Soil Aesthetics Criteria. 2007. (Courtesy of the artist.)
3.1.2 Philip Beesley (Canada)
Another example of immersive installation soil art explores
the more porous, labyrinthine qualities of the soil as a spatial
entity without actually moving a grain. An ongoing re-
search project by architects Philip Beesley, Rachel Armstrong,
Hayley Isaacs, Eric Bury, and Jonathan Tyrell, Hy-
lozoic Soil (Fig. 10) is an interactive environment of tiny
sensors, “groves of frond-like ‘breathing’ pores, tongues and
thickets of twitching whiskers” and other mechanized components
that make up what Beesley envisions as a proto-
typical model of “immersive architecture and synthetic ecology”
(Beesley and Armstrong, 2011). With far more potential
than the massive, inert, singly functioning building material
it is commonly considered, the soil is seen as a responsive
framework for myriad encounters and a physical template
for social and biological evolution. Where de Maria and Fischer
challenge the viewer’s experience of architecture by in-
stalling soil within the familiar framework of walls and floors
in Earth Room and You, Beesley and his partners challenge
the very idea of architecture by redefining that framework
of walls and floors as a system of reactive pore spaces that
imitate the soil.
Hylozoism refers to the Greek philosophy that life may
be found in all matter. Hylozoic Soil is a multisensory kinetic
installation that uses the sculptural metaphor of fer-
tile soil to bring architecture – usually inert – to life. It simultaneously
references the microbial aesthetics of mycor-
rhizal plant–root–fungi interdependence and the metaphysics
of Graham Cairns-Smith’s controversial clay-life hypothesis.4
Like the hyper-reactivity of clay particles, the delicately
responsive structures of Hylozoic Soil are predetermined to
evolve and change based on human (or other biological) presence.
A meshed network of movement sensors, air filters, and
flasks filled with ferrofluids sends feedback signals of light
and rippling movement triggered by the smallest presence of
otherness within the system (Beesley and Armstrong, 2011).
It is this juxtapositioning of life as container and as contained
that creates tension in Beesley’s work.
As an installation, or architectural prototype, Hylozoic Soil
succeeds in momentarily transporting human experience to
the scale of a springtail, reminiscent of multimedia exhibits
that magnify the soil microcosm in natural history museums
and soil educational exhibitions.5 But Beesley and his partners
have created more than an installation to contemplate the
4In his controversial book, Seven Clues to the Origin of Life,
Cairns-Smith (1985) proposed that clays were a proto-organic vehicle
or template for biological replication.
5See, for example, soil pore-space-scale models at the Dig It!
The Secrets of the Soil exhibit at the Smithsonian Institution’s National
Museum of Natural History, Washington DC; the Unter Wel-
ten exhibit at the Museum am Schölerberg in Osnabrück, Germany;
www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/ SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015
 552 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art
 
 
 
 
  Figure 8. Walter de Maria. New York Earth Room. 1977. Long-term installation at 141 Wooster Street, New York City. Photo: John Cliett.
Courtesy of Dia Art Foundation, New York.
complexity of the soil. They use the concept of the living soil
to challenge accepted notions of architecture by focusing on
the fantastic universe of soil pore systems – the spaces in between
– rather than the predictable boundaries of cubes and
spheres that separate life (via traditional architectural structures)
from the wilderness beyond. Beesley remarks:
In opposition to design principles of the past century
that favored optimal equations where maxi-
mum volume might be enclosed by the minimum
possible surface, the structures in Hylozoic Ground
prefer diffuse, deeply reticulated skins (Beesley
and Armstrong, 2011).
If we think about the immense surface area of a soil, with
pore spaces matching aggregates, and sand, silt and clay fractions
evenly distributed to allow for optimized flow of water,
air, nutrients, and biota, we approach a new vision of architecture
where no space is empty and no structure is station-
ary. A handful of loam becomes the ultimate installation and
architectural template for life itself.
and the Unter Unseren Füßen exhibit of the Senckenberg Museum
of Natural History in Görlitz, Germany.
3.2 Gesamtkunstwerk
3.2.1 Claire Pentecost (USA)
As a term that gained currency in the 1960s to describe a
“construction or assemblage conceived for a specific interior,
often for a temporary period, and distinguished from more
conventional sculpture as a discrete object by its physical
domination of the entire space” (Grove Art Online, 2009), installation
art has become a household name in the contempo-
rary art world. By its nature, installation art can reference and
appropriate all other visual art forms, cherry-picking different
styles, media, and techniques to condense meaning into
three-dimensional spatial experience. Some artists and critics
have referred to installation art as a development of the
concept of Gesamtkunstwerk, a total work of art, as it appropriates
a spectrum of different artistic disciplines brought
together into one work (de Oliveira et al., 1993). This reading
of installation art as a total work of art consisting of many related
parts is exemplified by a further example, Claire Pente-
cost’s acclaimed contribution to dOCUMENTA 13 in Kassel,
the Soil-Erg (Fig. 11).
In the rotunda of the historic Ottoneum, a theater turned
hospital turned gallery turned natural history museum, Claire
Pentecost assembled a series of drawings, sculptures, worm
compost, and appropriated museum pieces that all revolved
around a central theme – the soil as post-capitalist currency
and common resource that anyone can create by learning how
SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015 www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/
 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art 553
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Urs Fischer. you. 2007. Excavation in gallery space (Gavin Brown’s Enterprise, New York). Installation view. Collection of The
Brant Foundation, Greenwich, Connecticut (© Urs Fischer. Courtesy of the artist and Gavin Brown’s Enterprise, New York. Photo: Ellen
Page Wilson; additional photos at https://www.gavinbrown.biz/artists/urs_fischer/works).
to compost. As part of this well-researched Gesamtkunstwerk,
Pentecost participated in a three-month residency pro-
gram at the University of Kassel’s Faculty of Organic Agricultural
Sciences, offered workshops at dOCUMENTA 13
on composting, soil health, and capitalist alternatives to
land grabbing, and developed a series of pillar-like vertical
planters in and around the city together with designer and
philanthropist Ben Friton of the CanYa Love Foundation.
The installation at the Ottoneum served as the visual centerpiece
of Soil-Erg, visited by thousands of people over the
course of the summer.
Lining the walls of the Ottoneum are oversized soil coins,
too big and crumbly to fit in anyone’s pockets, and 43 drawings
in earth-based pigments that reference the graphic style
of banknotes. The series of soil-erg bills features images of
historic figures of sustainable agriculture such as Rachel Carson,
Wangari Maathai, and Vandana Shiva, as well as influ-
ential ecological artists and writers such as Joseph Beuys and
www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/ SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015
 554 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art
 
 
Figure 10. Philip Beesley et al. Hylozoic Soil. 2007. Installation at the Musée des Beaux Arts, Montreal, Canada, 2007 (© PBAI, courtesy
of the artist).
Henry David Thoreau, and a cast of non-human soil workers
from snails and bees to fungal mycelium and bacteriophagic
nematodes. The installation proposes a new system of value
based on living soil. At the center of the room compost made
from local food waste is symbolically pressed and stacked
into the shape of gold bars, representing units of a new currency
– the soil-erg.
Mounted on another wall of the Ottoneum, like the ghost
of an affluent fossil fuel past, is the Richelsdorfer Mountain
Cabinet from 1783, a scale model of Hesse’s geologic
strata once used for teaching the fundamentals of extraction.
Next to the historical cabinet appropriated from the
natural history museum’s collection, a new cabinet squirms
with worm compost produced in part by the food scraps
of visiting dOCUMENTA guests, offset by a list of current
“land-grabbing” deals between sovereign countries in Africa,
Asia, and South America and multinational agribusiness concerns.6
If we go back to the sheer gravity of Walter de Maria’s
Earth Room, we recognize not only a playful approach to
redefining architectural space but also an underlying intention
to free art from the commodification and value control
of the market economy – a reoccurring debate of installation
art. A pile of earth cannot be as easily auctioned as
6Pentecost cites the following websites for her list of landgrabbing
info presented in the Soil-Erg installation: http://
farmlandgrab.org/ and http://oaklandinstitute.org
a landscape painting or ceramic bowl. Claire Pentecost extends
such ideas about the de-commodification of art to the
soil, using sculpture, drawing, writing, lecturing, collaborative
engineering, public participation, urban gardening, and
composting as a Gesamtkunstwerk to not only explore but
also demand new systems of value for the soil.
Made of soil and work, the soil-erg both is and
is not an abstraction. Symbolically, it refers to a
field of value, but that value is of a special nature:
soil must be produced and maintained in a context.
It is completely impractical to circulate it. It is
heavy, and, because of the loose structure required
of good soil, it falls apart. . . . The physical nature
of soil the soil-erg both evokes and denies the possibility
of coinage. If currency as we know it is the
ultimate deterritorialization, the soil-erg’s value is
inherently territorialized (Pentecost, 2012).
While human societies have long benefited from the goods
and services of the soil, including food production and
medicines; materials for pigments, ceramics, and building
constructions; and materials for religious and spiritual activities,
the notion of valuing and protecting the soil on account
of its goods and services is a more recent phenomenon of
the mid-20th century. With the emergence of emissions trading
and environmental economic accounts in the early 1990s,
natural functions have become increasingly instrumentalized
and institutionalized under the rubric of ecosystems services
SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015 www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/
 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art 555 
 
Figure 11. Claire Pentecost. Soil-Erg. Installation at dOCUMENTA 13 (2012). (© Claire Pentecost, courtesy of the artist, photo Jürgen
Hess.)
(Gómez-Baggethun et al., 2010), which is effectively an economic
approach to understanding and valuing natural func-
tions as “goods”. The role of the soil is not only to provide
foods and fibers; its optimal management also considers regulation
of climate, mitigation of pollution, maintenance of
biodiversity, etc. But this system of goods and services must
also be considered in the framework of ethical, spiritual, and
aesthetic dimensions. By choosing a unit of energy for the
title of her installation (erg is short for the Greek word for
work, ergon, and represents the equivalent of 10−7 joules),
Pentecost places an abstract value on the soil that challenges
the restrictive vision of soil as provider of goods and services
that can be monetarily quantified for dominant market
economies.
4 Film
In the visual arts, soil is sometimes “in your face” – it is
the foreground, the medium, the center of attention, as in the
works of the above-mentioned artists. In contrast and not unexpectedly,
this is rarely the case in Hollywood films. Nev-
ertheless, location scouts and directors clearly recognize that
soils can form a visually striking element that adds mood
and texture to the viewing experience. Some filmmakers have
recognized the human connection to the soil and have used
it in their storytelling. A few screenwriters and filmmakers
have gone even further and moved from the typical view of
soils as a static backdrop on which the action is played out to
a view of soils as a dynamic ecosystem feature.
Woman in the Dunes (1964) and Dune (1984), two films
previously discussed in detail in Landa (2010), focus on not
only the dynamism of the moving sands but also on the subsurface
water of the dune as a key ecosystem feature. Soil
is central to the story of planet Arrakis in Dune, the David
Lynch film based upon the 1965 novel by Frank Herbert. Indeed
the “planetary ecologist” who is the hero of the Dune
saga was based upon an Oregon soil scientist (Landa, 2010).
A 2013 documentary Jodorowsky’s Dune, on the unsuccessful
mid-1970s attempt of surrealist director Alejandro Jodor-
owsky to adapt and film Herbert’s novel, is reviving interest
in both the Lynch film and in Herbert as a potent force in the
environmental movement.
The natural history of the prairie and the abundance derived
from the soil is exquisitely depicted in Days of Heaven,
the 1978 film by acclaimed director Terrence Malick. Characterized
by rich images and sparse dialog,7 this circa 1915
tale of life on the wheat farms of Texas (actually filmed in
Alberta and Montana) includes a brief but memorable timelapse
photography sequence by cinematographer Ken Mid-
7For soil scientists, an endearing and perhaps unscripted line
(33:10 to 33:26) in Days of Heaven has a 12-year-old girl,
played by Linda Manz, musing in voice-over about her future,
as she studies a clod of soil and lowers her ear to the earth: “I
could be a mud doctor. . . checking out the earth. . . underneath.”
www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/ SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015
 556 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art
dleham.8 The footage (originally shot for the 1979 documentary
The Secret Life of Plants; Weber, 2007) is accompanied
by a soundtrack composed and conducted by Ennio Morricone.
Images of unfurling seedlings and probing roots have
a special magic for scientists and non-scientists alike – see,
for example, the 10 January 2014 cover of Science magazine
showing a lateral root emerging from the main root of
a young Arabidopsis thaliana plant (http://www.sciencemag.
org/content/343/6167.cover-expansion).
Indeed, moving images of elongating roots seem to beg for
music, a fact not unnoticed by Auburn University plant physiologist
Elizabeth (“Betty”) L. Klepper and her US Depart-
ment of Agriculture/Agricultural Research Service colleague
Morris G. Huck. Their 16 mm film, Time-lapse photography
of root growth, depicting research at the Auburn rhizotron
(Fig. 12) where cotton roots in soil were observed through
glass panels while the plant tops were exposed to field conditions
(Taylor 1969; Huck et al., 1970), premiered at the 11th
International Botanical Congress in Seattle in the summer of
1969.
The film opens with a classical musical soundtrack
that appears to be a re-write of Luigi Boccherini’s
“Celebrated Minuet”9 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
epJahNtJzss). Klepper wrote the film’s narration that was
later recorded by a staff member from Auburn University
Television. He recommended several possible accompanying
music selections to the research team. Klepper and Huck selected
one that had a dramatic upturn in the music at a point
in the edited, final version of the film where a root growing
down a pane of glass has disappeared behind the soil and
suddenly reappears (e-mail, E. L. Klepper to E. R. Landa;
21 April 2014). The film was given new life in 1999 with
its re-release on DVD by the American Society of Agronomy/Crop
Science Society of America/Soil Science Soci-
ety of America, and has been a popular instructional video
(Kirkham, 2011).
The works of Klepper/Huck in the scientific sphere, and
of Middleham in the commercial film world, are early examples
of the convergence of film with the soil and plant
sciences. More recently, soil scientist/geo-archaeologist Paul
Adderley (University of Stirling, Scotland) and composer
Michael Young (University of London) have collaborated on
8For an in-depth look at the time-lapse photography of Ken
Middleham (1927–2001), see Filming the Invisible: The Story
of Ken Middleham, Cinematographer at http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=cDElLm1hfSQ and http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
azIXfxqFVQo. Middleham was the natural history cinematographer
on The Secret Life of Plants (http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=sGl4btrsiHk), and the soundtrack to accompany his images
there was composed and performed by Stevie Wonder.
9The Boccherini minuet has been used in the soundtrack of a
considerable number of feature films (http://www.imdb.com/name/
nm0090530/), including the Coen brothers’ The Ladykillers (2004).
Exposure: Understanding Living in Extreme Environments
(http://www.ground-breaking.net/exposure.html), an installation
that integrates sight and sound across scales ranging
from the microscopic to the landscape scale and that depicts
both the physicality of soil and its role as a cultural
archive of past civilizations (an experimental 12 min video
from the installation is available at http://soundsrite.uws.edu.
au/soundsRiteContent/volume4/YoungInfo.html).
Modern rhizotron facilities, sampling devices adapted
from engineering and medicine (including borescopes and
laparoscopic samplers), and advanced, three-dimensional tomographic
imaging techniques offer new opportunities for
creative explorations at the interface of science and art, with
the potential of attracting new collaborators and audiences to
soil science.
Ken Middleham’s talents in micro-scale motion picture
photography were also put to use in the 1974 science fiction
film Phase IV, where ants become a threat to human civilization.
Middleham provided the insect photography – which
has appropriately been described as “creating a sort of animal
acting verisimilitude that has gone unmatched on film before
or since” (Gilchrist, 2012). But from a viewer’s perspective
of the entire film – aptly described as “an ecological parable
set within the science fiction genre” (Bass and Kirkham,
2011, p. 257) – soil is primarily featured not in the microphotography
of ant activity but on the macro-scale, in towering
geometric obelisks made of soil. Rising from the desert floor,
they are ominous; the massive and alien occurrence of soil in
these ant observation towers and in the form of massive solar
reflectors, combined with the storyline and soundtrack, is a
highly effective conveyor of threat to the viewer. Having observed
much smaller, cylindrical, indurated-soil ant nests in
Oregon (Landa, 1977), this image had particular resonance
with me – the unfamiliar soil feature in that case provoking
curiosity.
The director of Phase IV, Saul Bass (1920–1996), was
a noted graphic designer whose corporate logos (e.g., the
United Airlines “flying U” and blue/red/orange stripes) are
known to all, and whose design of motion picture title sequences
and advertising posters made him a sought-after tal-
ent in Hollywood – the directors with whom Bass worked included
Otto Preminger, Alfred Hitchcock, Stanley Kubrick,
and Martin Scorsese (who wrote the foreword to the Bass and
Kirkham book). There is a strong linear character in many of
the Bass graphics, and this signature style is reflected in the
imagining and construction of the soil pillars for the only
feature film that he directed.
Bass conceptualized and designed all of the earthen manifestations
of the ant civilization in the film – the tunnels, tow-
ers, reflectors, and the final chamber (e-mail from J. Bass,
6 May 2014). The film critic of London’s Sunday Times
picked up on the linkage of design, imagery, and mood, calling
Phase IV “a film of design, of unsentimental forces set
against one another in lines, curves, angles, shining surfaces.
Beautiful, but always threatening, mysterious, forbidding.”
SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015 www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/
 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art 557
 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Time-lapse photography setup used by Klepper and Huck at the Auburn rhizotron to examine root behavior behind glass panels
(courtesy of Alabama Agricultural Experiment Station). The camera support could be moved to allow photography of any part of the visible
root system. The 1/2 in. square grid-wire mesh embedded in the glass panes provided a measuring scale and would reduce shattering if the
glass broke (from Taylor, 1969).
(Bass and Kirkham, 2011, p. 258). Although the story is set
in Arizona, the outdoor filming was done in the Rift Valley
of Kenya, and Bass had to be careful not to get a giraffe in
the shot (e-mail from J. Bass, 6 May 2014).
Bass’ surreal epilogue to the film (cut by Paramount
Pictures and not on the presently available DVD) was
screened for the first time in Los Angeles in 2012
(Gilchrist, 2012). Available at http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=beLpsWaUDNk, it is a stunning summation that is
a must-see to get the unambiguous storyline and to appreciate
Bass’ artistic vision in its full realization. Marketed by
Paramount Pictures as a B-horror movie, Phase IV had only
a small footprint in the US, but was a hit in France (Bass
and Kirkham, 2011). Hopefully Saul Bass’ pioneering work
will receive greater attention when scholars and movie buffs
gather to discuss environmental films, and future audiences
will get to see the uncut version of Phase IV.
As soil scientists, our view of soil in films is admittedly
atypical. A case in point is the 2011 film from director Lech
Majewski, The Mill and the Cross. A truly unique film inspired
by a still image – Pieter Bruegel’s 1564 painting The
Procession to Calvary depicting Christ carrying the cross to
the crucifixion in a reimagined 16th century Flemish setting
– it has a scene in which a woman is buried alive. The grave
has box-like, vertical walls. But even more visually powerful
than the geometry are the color contrasts and the strong
horizon boundaries in the soil exposed on the pit walls:
– a very dark surface which grades to a somewhat lighter
brown,
– then a very sharp demarcation to a thick white layer.
Captivated by the image, my first thoughts were
– Was that the natural color in the soil pit? If yes, was the
filming location specifically chosen for this look?
– Alternatively, were some profile color effects enhanced
through computer-generated imagery or other methods?
I had a series of e-mail exchanges with director Lech Majewski
on these questions (e-mails, L. Majewski to E. R. Landa:
31 December 2012; 26 February 2014). The scene was shot
near Katowice, Poland, on an old slag-deposit field. The
choice of the pit site was just chance – the look of the soil
had nothing to do with the selection of the filming location;
rather, the slope was chosen to give a good view of the monks
in the same shot. The lesson for me was clear – not all depictions
of soil, even if eye-catching for a soil scientist, are
conscious acts of filmmaking. But one can dream. . .
5 Conclusions
Art is one way of communicating the complex visual, cultural,
and symbolic dimensions embodied in the soil. We
www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/ SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015
 558 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art
have presented a set of case studies taken from three formal
artistic traditions: painting, installation, and film. While
some examples are more incidental depictions of the soil,
others are focused on environmental, social, and political
questions surrounding soil and land use. Although the examples
stem from our personal interests in the given genres,
we come to the following conclusions:
– Artworks focused on soils and landscapes provide a different
way of appreciating the soil and could therefore
be valuable for soil conservation and soil awareness
raising efforts.
– Professional soil science societies should encourage interdisciplinary
collaboration in areas such as soil and
art, soil and culture, soil and religion, and soil and history.
– At the same time, the soil science community can offer
the art world a new analytical lens to examine soil and
environmental protection issues.
– Artists expand the realm of soil science research with
visual, cultural, and symbolic forms of inquiry, offering
new ways of visualizing, interpreting, and interacting
with soil.
In contrast to soil scientific work, artistic work is designed
to touch our emotions and provoke discussions on environmental,
social, and political change. Both science and art are
necessary for raising soil awareness. Only when the soil science
community is more broadly based will soil protection
become more relevant for the public at large and for decision
makers.
Acknowledgements. For Sect. 4, thanks to Jennifer Bass,
Stephen Henry (University of Maryland; Michelle Smith Performing
Arts Library), Pat Kirkham (Bard Graduate Center; Decorative
Arts, Design History, Material Culture), Betty Klepper (USDAARS,
retired), Lech Majewski, and Donald Manildi (University
of Maryland; International Piano Archives) for their generous
responses to queries.
Edited by: C. C. Muggler
References
Alley, R.: Catalogue of the Tate Gallery’s Collection of Modern Art
other than Works by British Artists, Tate Gallery and Sotheby
Parke-Bernet, London, 1981.
Arthur, J.: Green Woods and Crystal Waters: The American Landscape
Tradition, Philbrook Museum of Art, Tulsa, OK, 2000.
Bass, J. and Kirkham, P.: Saul Bass: A life in film & design, Laurence
King Publishing, London, 2011.
Beesley, P. and Armstrong, R.: Soil and Protoplasm, The Hylozoic
Ground Project, Architectural Design, 81, 78–89, 2011.
Cairns-Smith, A. G.: Seven Clues to the Origin of Life, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1985.
Catalogue Gianadda: Dubuffet, Exposition 4 mars – 10 juin 1993,
Fondation Pierre Gianadda, Martigny, Suisse, 238 p., 1993.
Certini, G. and Ugolini, F. C.: An updated, expanded, universal definition
of soil, Geoderma, 192, 378–379, 2013.
Della Monica, L.: Painted Landscapes: Contemporary Views, Schiffer
Publishing, Ltd, Atglen, PA, 2013.
Demolon, A.: Principes d’Agronomie, Tome 1. Dynamique du Sol,
5th Edn., Dunod, Paris, 520 pp., 1952.
De Oliveira, N., Oxley, N., and Petry, M.: On Installation, Art &
Design Profile, 30, 7–11, 1993.
Dokuchaev, V. V.: The Russian Chernozem, in: Selected Works of
V. V. Dokuchaev, Vol. 1, 14–419. Moscow, 1948, Israel Program
for Scientific Translations Ltd. (for USDA-NSF), edited
by: Monson, S., Jerusalem, 1967 (Translated from Russian into
English by N. Kander), 1883.
Feller, C., Chapuis-Lardy, L., and Ugolini, F.: The representation
of soil in the Western Art: from Genesis to Pedogenesis, in: Soil
and Culture, edited by: Landa, E. R. and Feller, C., Springer, Dordrecht,
Heidelberg, London, New York, Netherlands, Chapter 1,
3–22, 488 pp. + Color Plates, 2010.
Gilchrist, T.: Saul Bass’ long-lost original ending for
“Phase IV” unearthed in Los Angeles, available
at: http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/
saul-bass-phase-iv-original-ending-cinefamily-paramount-341449
(last access: 25 January 2015), 2012.
Gómez-Baggethun, E., de Groot, R., Lomas, P., and Montes, C.: The
history of ecosystem services in economic theory and practice:
From early notions to markets and payment schemes, Ecological
Economics, 69, 1209–1218, 2010.
Grove Art Online: Grove Art Online, available at: http:
//www.oxfordartonline.com/public/book/oao_gao (last access:
9 September 2012), 2009.
Hartemink, A. E.: The depiction of soil profiles since the late 1700s,
Catena, 79, 113–127, 2009.
Hartemink, A.: On the relation between soils and climate, oral communication
(12 June 2014) at the 20th World Congress of Soil
Science, Jeju, Korea, 2014.
Hartemink, A. E., Balks, M. R., Chen, Z. S., Drohan, P., Field, D.,
Krasilniko, P., Lowe, D. J., Rabenhorst, M., van Rees, K., Schad,
P., Schipper, L. A., Sonneveld, M., and Walter, C.: The joy of
teaching soil science, Geoderma, 217–218, 1–9, 2014.
Huck, M. G., Klepper, B., and Taylor, H. M.: Diurnal variations in
root diameter, Plant Physiol., 45, 529–530, 1970.
Jenny, H.: The image of soil in landscape art, old and new, in: Study
Week on Organic Matter and Soil Fertility, edited by Pontificiae
Academiae Scientarium Scripta, Varia 32, North Holland Publ.
Co and Wiley Interscience Division, Amsterdam, New York,
947–979, 1968.
Kastner, J. and Wallis, B.: Land and Environmental Art, NY,
Phaidon, 1998.
Kester, G. H.: The One and the Many – Contemporary Collaborative
Art in a Global Context, Duke University Press, Durham and
London, 2011.
Kirkham, M. B.: Elevated carbon dioxide: Impacts on soil and plant
water relations, Boca Raton, CRC Press, Florida, 2011.
Kubiena, W. L.: Bestimmungsbuch und Systematik der Boden Europas,
Ferdinand Enke Verlag, Stuttgart, 392 pp., 1953.
SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015 www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/
 C. Feller et al.: Case studies of soil in art 559
Landa, E. R.: An unusual ant nest morphology for the ant Formica
fusca Linne in western Oregon, Pan-Pacific Entomologist, 53,
250–252, 1977.
Landa, E. R.: In a supporting role: Soil and the cinema, in: Soil
and Culture, edited by: Landa, E. R. and Feller, C., Dordrecht,
Springer, 83–105, 2010.
Landa, E. R. and Feller, C. (Eds): Soil and Culture, Springer, Dordrecht,
Heidelberg, London, New York, Netherlands, 488 pp. +
Color Plates, 2010.
Marijnissen, R. H. and Ruyffelaere, P.: Jérome Bosch, Tout l’œuvre
peint et dessiné, Fonds Mercator, Albin Michel, Paris, Anvers,
513 pp., 1987.
Muggler, C. C.: Soil paints as a tool to increase soil awareness
among different publics, Geophys. Res. Abstr., EGU2013-
13986, EGU General Assembly 2013, Vienna, Austria, 2013.
Pentecost, C.: Notes from the Underground. dOCUMENTA13: 100
Notes, 100 Thoughts, 61, Hatje Cantz, 2012.
Rosenthal, M.: Understanding Installation Art – From Duchamp to
Holzer, Prestel, Munich, Berlin, London, New York, 2003.
Szlezak, E.: Soilart – Painting with the Colours of the Earth, Project
description from the Amt der NÖ Landesregierung, Abteilung
Landentwicklung, available at: http://www.soilart.eu/1-0-Home.
htm (last access: 20 December 2011), 2009.
Taylor, H. M.: The rhizotron at Auburn – A plant root observatory
system, Auburn University, Agricultural Experiment Station Circular,
171, 1969.
Thompson Klein, J.: Interdisciplinarity: history, theory, and practice,
Wayne State University Press, Detroit, MI, 1990.
Toland, A. and Wessolek G.: Merging horizons – soil science and
soil art, Chapter 4, 45–66, in: Soil and Culture, edited by: Landa,
E. R. and Feller, C., Springer, Dordrecht, Heidelberg, London,
New York, Netherlands, Chapter 4, 45–66, 488 pp. + Color
Plates, 2010.
Toland, A. and Wessolek, G.: Picturing soil: aesthetic approaches
to raising soil awareness in contemporary art, in: The Soil Underfoot.
Infinite Possibilities for a Finite Resource, edited by:
Churchman, G. J. and Landa, E. R., CRC Press, Taylor & Francis
Group, Boca Raton, USA, Chapter 7, 83–102, 421 pp. + Color
Plates, 2014.
Ugolini, F.: Soil colors, pigments and clays in paintings, in: Soil and
Culture, edited by: Landa, E. R. and Feller, C., Springer, Dordrecht,
Heidelberg, London, New York, Netherlands, Chapter 5,
pp. 67–82, 488 pp. + Color Plates, 2010.
Van Breemen, N.: Transcendental aspects of soil in contemporary
visual arts, in: Soil and Culture, edited by: Landa, E. R. and
Feller, C., Springer, Dordrecht, Heidelberg, London, New York,
Netherlands, Chapter 3, 37–46, 488 pp. + Color Plates, 2010.
Weber, B.: Commentary track (1:01:38–1:02:05) by Billy Weber,
Criterion Collection (2007) Days of Heaven, DVD, 2007.
Wessolek, G.: Art and Soil, Newsletter of the Committee on the
History, Philosophy, and Sociology of Soil Science International
Union of Soil Science and Council on the History, Philosophy,
and Sociology of Soil Science, Soil Sci. Soc. Am., 2, 14–16,
2002.
Zika, A.: ParTerre – Studien und Materialien zur Kulturgeschichte
des gestalteten Bodens. PhD Dissertation, Fachbereich 5 der Bergischen
Universität, Wuppertal, 2001.
www.soil-journal.net/1/543/2015/ SOIL, 1, 543–559, 2015
