XX The Impending Crisis 1858-1859 (LETTERS 1055 TO ll22) ON THE DAY BRYANT RETURNED to New York from Europe, the Evening Post carried a report from its correspondent at the scene of the second Lincoln- Douglas debate, on August 27 at Freeport, Illinois. Abraham Lincoln was, he wrote, "awkward" and "ugly," but "stir him up and the fire of his genius plays on every feature; [he is] a man of rare power and strong magnetic influence." While the seven debates continued, attracting ever-widening interest through- out the country, Bryant gave no editorial opinion of them, but soon after the final one, at Alton, Illinois, on October 15, he remarked, "No man of this gen- eration has grown more rapidly before the country than Mr. Lincoln in this canvas." Though Lincoln failed to unseat Douglas in their senatorial race, he established himself as a leading national figure. Throughout the ensuing year Bryant remained noncommittal on his choice of a candidate for the Republican nomination for the presidency in 1860. \Vhen, in January 1859, Senator Preston King of New York tried to pin him down, he "had no candidate or at least he named none." Bryant would, he said, support his party's choice, but he had serious "apprehensions" of Senator William H. Seward of New York, King's as well as John Bigelow's favorite for the nomina- tion. Three months later King reported to Bigelow at Paris, "I have not seen any thing in the Post indicating a disposition to discuss the question of Candi- dacy." To his brother John, however, Bryant confided that he considered Gov- ernor Salmon P. Chase of Ohio the man best qualified for the presidency, but feared Chase could not win the Republican nomination. If he was not yet ready to propose a future President, Bryant was outspoken time and again against the present one, Democrat James Buchanan. Let the President at least try to leave the office "with credit," he wrote, "a matter of which he seems hitherto to have taken no thought." But, he added, this was a difficult task for a man "whose conscience has become callous with wrong do- ing." Buchanan's was a "spendthrift" administration, he charged; it was trying stealthily to enact protective tariffs on the pretext of needing revenue. Its scheme to buy Cuba from Spain was a "childish" fraud-simply a "convenient pretext ... for invading it and attempting to possess it by force." Cuba was essential to Spain, its "West," and Europe was right to cry "hands off!" In seizing Cuba, we should "do precisely what we were warned against by the voice of Washington in his Farewell Address"-entangle ourselves in European politics. Buchanan's greatest sin, however, was a "blind devotion to the interests of the slaveholders," whose votes he counted on to win him re-election, while hold- ing the North through political patronage. Two months after Bryant's return John Bigelow took his family for an ex- The Impending Crisis 79 tended visit to Europe, where he followed Bryant's practice of writing to the newspaper accounts of events and personalities as he traveled about France and Italy. For several months Bryant busied himself with the daily conduct of their journal. Then, in February 1859, he took his son-in-law, Parke Godwin, back into the office, and at about the same time made WilliamS. Thayer, a former Washington correspondent, managing editor of the Evening Post, which had become, in the words of Isaac Henderson, "prosperous-very prosperous." With the newspaper "staggering under the burden of advertisements," Bryant con- fessed wryly to Bigelow in April, "The Evening Post has not been edited from the time you went away till within a few days, except by the advertisers." In recourse, an additional column was added to each of four pages in the already unwieldly folio sheet, for subscribers had begun to "complain bitterly of the encroachment of the advertisements upon the space allotted to news." Relieved of the tedium of management, and now able to leave to others the writing of routine copy, save for leading editorials, Bryant put together a second volume of his travel correspondence, covering his most recent European visit, which Appleton published in March 1859. The next month he was asked to con- tribute to Robert Bonner's widely popular weekly, the New York Ledger, a few poems "only when you feel the inspiration to write them." For these, the editor would be pleased "at any time" to hand him a $1,000 check. His first verses, "The Lost Bird," a translation from the Spanish of Carolina Coronado's El Pajaro Perdido, appeared in June. During the ensuing years Bonner published a dozen of Bryant's poems, as well as his translation of Coronado's romantic novel, jarilla. A great source of satisfaction to Bryant in the spring of 1859 was the progress being made in the development of New York's Central Park. Fifteen years earlier he had proposed its establishment in the Evening Post, and had often since repeated his suggestion. In April he visited the park with his brother- in-law Egbert Fairchild, an engineer busy building the new Croton Reservoir within its boundaries, and afterward likened the scene of prodigious labor to "Dido and her people building Carthage." Beyond his contribution of the park idea, Bryant had taken practical steps to bring it to fruition. He was one of those who endorsed Frederick Law Olm- sted's application for the superintendency of construction, and both the annual reports of the park commissioners and the successful Greensward Plan for the park's development prepared by Olmsted and Calvert Vaux appeared under the impress of William C. Bryant and Company. Bryant's admiration of Olmsted's abilities led him early in 1859 to the conclusion that the park's superintendent, "who is a man of great administra- tive capacity, who selects all his subordinates and agents with an instinctive wisdom, and who does not allow a dollar of the public money to be paid out except for value received, would be an infinitely better President than we have had since Van Buren, but nobody will think of nominating him, and few would know whom they were voting for when they gave him their suffrage." Returning from abroad, Bryant had resumed an active association with fellow-members of the Sketch Club and at the Century, which was prospering in a new home on Fifteenth Street, its membership having grown to two-hundred- fifty. His popularity with the artists, both as subject and inspiration, was as 80 LEITERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT great as ever. He sat for portraits to Thomas Hicks, Sanford Gifford, Alonzo Chappel, Anthon Henry Wenzler, William T. Mathews, and Charles Cromwell Ingham. John Durand caused his father's likeness of Bryant-that for which Mrs. Bryant had given the artist "a thousand thanks for making something pleasing of a face which so many have caricatured"-to be engraved for popular subscription. Matthew Brady again photographed Bryant, as he had in 1845. Several landscape painters borrowed the themes of Bryant's "The Death of the Flowers," "Green River," and "Thanatopsis." Renewing old friendships, Bryant could only have been pleased with Rich- ard Dana's comment on his new volume of letters, "It calmed me like a sunlight, gentle and with no glare, ... the style beautifully pure and simple," and with Orville Dewey's tribute to the Evening Post, "the best paper I think in Amer- ica." Dewey and George Bancroft vied for his presence at their country homes. Boston financier and an influential Republican, John Murray Forbes, who con- sidered Bryant "the leader of the only really Democratic party which ever existed," reminded the editor of a long-standing "half-promise" to visit him at his island home, Naushon, off Cape Cod, offering to send his forty-ton yacht to meet the Bryants at New Bedford. Forbes had "set his heart" on Bryant's company, he told Catharine Sedgwick. An earlier international friendship was enhanced when the English parliamentary leader Richard Cobden visited New York in March 1859; Bryant dined with him several times, in company with Bancroft, William H. Osborn, and Charles Leupp. In October 1859, in the death of his intimate friend Leupp, Bryant bore a loss comparable only to that occasioned by the death of Thomas Cole a decade earlier. The two had worked closely together nearly twenty years before to form the American Art-Union; they had traveled in company abroad four times; they had been active in making the Sketch Club and the Century Association primary forces in molding the city's cultural life; each had been among the most staunch friends and patrons of American artists. The shock of Leupp's death was the heavier because a growing despondency had led him to suicide. Before serving as a pallbearer at his funeral, Bryant wrote for the Evening Post an obituary which was read into the minutes of the Sketch Club. His "dearly cherished friend" had been, he said, "one of those whom the maxims and habits of trade had never corrupted; a man of open and generous temper, who ab- horred every form of deceit and every unfair advantage, sensitive to blame, al- most to excess, yet never to be driven by blame from any course which he thought right." Less than two months later Bryant lost an older, if not so intimate a friend, Washington Irving. Soon afterward, he was asked to deliver the eulogy at a memorial meeting of the New-York Historical Society, of which Irving had been one of its earliest, most beloved members. And Bryant experienced still another bereavement that fateful autumn with the passing of Theodore Sedgwick Ill, son of his early mentor in economic theory, and himself Bryant's collaborator for many years in the Evening Post's editorial columns, as well as in a collection of William Leggett's Political Writings. That the autumn of 1859 would be remembered as fateful was made evi- dent in a political event which quickly polarized public opinion in both North The Impending Crisis 81 and South on the issue of slavery. On the night of October 16 John Brown of Osawatomie led a little band of radical Abolitionists in an abortive raid on the government arsenal at Harper's Ferry, Virginia. The raiders were quickly killed or captured by federal forces under Brevet Colonel Robert E. Lee, and six weeks later Brown was hanged by Virginia authorities, as newspaper readers across the land were given accounts of his final words and acts. On the day Brown was captured, Bryant, though deploring his attempt to start a slave in- surrection, reminded his readers, North and South, that the brutal persecution by slaveholders of free-state Kansas settlers, and of Brown and his family, had taught him to use violence; the advocates of extending the slave trade, Bryant charged, were "as great fanatics as Brown." Brown's execution drew from Bryant an editorial in which he called at- tention to its profound significance. "It is an event in our national history," he wrote, "which warrants every thoughtful man amongst us in pondering over it deeply." Brown's "heroism," his "fortitude," his "hatred of oppression," Bryant predicted, would lead a "large part of the civilized public" to "lay on his tomb the honors of martyrdom." His memory would be "more terrible to slaveholders than his living presence could ever be," for it would "bring re- cruits to his cause who would never have served under his banner while he was wielding carnal weapons." History, "forgetting the errors of his judgment in the contemplation of his unfaltering courage, of his dignified and manly de- portment in the face of death, and of the nobleness of his aims," would "record his name among those of its martyrs and heroes." A week after Brown's execution the national House of Representatives ex- ploded in bitter contention, lasting nearly two months, over the election of a Speaker. The Republican candidate, John Sherman of Ohio, had-with sixty- eight other northern congressmen and many prominent citizens-signed an ap- peal for money to print 100,000 condensed copies of Hinton Rowan Helper's 1857 indictment of slavery, The Impending Crisis of the South, as a campaign document. This powerful, if intemperate, attack on the "peculiar institution" as an insurmountable obstacle to southern growth, by a North Carolinian, urged the great majority of southerners, who were without slaves, to get rid of the system, either by the ballot, or, if necessary, by violence. Extremist southern congressmen fought for a resolution declaring that no man who had signed such an instrument was fit to be elected Speaker. As the parliamentary struggle went on with ever-more-reckless language on both sides, and virtually every member of the House armed with a gun, it seemed that the as yet unorganized body might become an uncontrolled mob, and a sectional conflict erupt within the walls of the nation's Capitol. At the time of its first publication Helper's book had been praised in the Evening Post. Now, as it found notoriety far beyond its popular appeal, Bryant urged each southern reader of his newspaper to examine Helper's arguments, and to "ask himself seriously whether he does not think that slavery is an evil to which an early remedy ought to be applied by the slave states themselves." 82 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT 1055. To Orville Dewey New York, September 9th [1858] ... I brought back Mrs. Bryant nearly as well as she was when I carried her off to Europe, and gaining strength so steadily that I have great hopes of soon seeing her even better than she was there. Julia came home in fine health and spirits. The voyage was one of the smoothest ever made; soft airs and a quiet sea, and the passengers pleased with the weather, the ship, and each other. 1 We passed a month in England, where we heard a good many inquiries about you, and answered them, I think, to the general satisfaction. Mr. Edwin Field wrote on our account to Mr. Flower, of Stratford, and the result was an invitation to "The Hill," the name of his place. We went, and passed two days there very pleasantly. You were freshly remem- bered in the family, who have been noted for their hospitality to Ameri- cans.2 Both Mr. Field and Mr. Flower are of those who grow more con- servative as they grow older, a common case, as Mr. Flower had the good fortune to become rich, which is another makeweight in favor of conser- vatism. He is thinking of going into Parliament. Nine days we were at Mr. Ferdinand Field's, near Evesham, a little town in a pleasant agricultural district of Worcestershire, where cucumbers flourish in the open air, and the grape ripens on the south side of walls. Here my wife gained strength every day, and I took walks with our agree- able host, for very agreeable I found him, on the neighboring hills. But I cannot say that I much liked the peep into English life which this brief residence gave me. So many sets and classes of people, each jealous of in- trusion from below, and anxious to get admission into the class above.3 At Birmingham, we were the guests of Mrs. Alfred Field; her husband at this moment is in the United States.4 They live in a nice little village called Edgbaston, just out of the smoke and jar of the town, and from this place Julia and I made an excursion to Lichfield and Aston Hall 5 with Mrs. Field for our cicerone. Near to Edgbaston is Shenstone's famous place, the Leasowes,6 now in possession of [an ironmasterF Mr. Mathews, who has put it in neat order again, bringing back the rivulets that were stagnating into marshes to their ancient channels, and opening the old paths in the dark woods by their side. I walked over it with a Birmingham8 gentleman and the proprietor. But I did not mean when I began this letter to give you a history of our travels. They are over for the present. [My best regards to Mrs. Dewey, and to your daughter if they are with you. My wife and daughter would send their love if they knew I was writing. Yours faithfully W C BRYANT] The Impending Crisis 83 MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR (draft fragment) TEXT: Life, II, II7-Il8 ADDREss: [Dr. 0. Dewey]. I. Leaving Liverpool on the steamship Africa on August 21, the Bryants reached New York on September 2. 2. As a boy of twelve, Edward Flower had been taken by his father Richard (1761- 1829) to Illinois. Returning to England seven years later, he settled at Stratford, where he prospered as a brewer and horse fancier. In 1864, as mayor, he organized a Shake- speare tercentenary. His eldest son, by whom the Bryants were also entertained during their short visit, founded the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre in 1879. 3. For an account of Bryant's visit to Evesham, see his "Diary, 1857-1858," July 31- August 9, 1858. 4. Alfred Field had written Bryant on July 16 (MS William Cullen Bryant II) that he was unexpectedly required to sail for the United States on July 24 for a "business arrangement of importance." 5. Lichfield, fifteen miles north of Birmingham, and a cathedral town, had been the home of Dr. Samuel Johnson (1709-1784), son of a local bookseller. Aston Hall, Birmingham, built by Sir Thomas Holte (1571-1654), sheriff of Warwickshire, is thought to be the original of Washington Irving's Bracebridge Hall (1822). The printed text mistakenly reads "Litchfield." 6. The poet William Shenstone (1714-1763) was born and lived for most of his life at Leasowes, an estate near Halesowen, nine miles west of Birmingham, which he beauti- fied in the picturesque manner. 7. Matter in brackets is taken from the manuscript. 8. The printed text mistakenly has "Brummagen"! 1056. To Frederick Swartwout Cozzens1 New York September lOth 1858. My dear sir. You ask my opinion concerning the errand on which you go to Eu- rope.2 I certainly hope most earnestly that it will have a result favorable to the great object of protecting the property of authors and artists from pil- lage. Holding as I do that this kind of property rests on as just a foundation as any other, I have ever been of opinion that it is as churlish an act to re- fuse to protect it when belonging to a foreigner, as it would be 3 ... MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR (partial draft) ADDRESS: To Frederick Swartwout Cozzens Esq. I. Cozzens (1818-1869), a New York wine merchant and humorous writer, is best remembered for his The Sparrowgrass Papers (1856). 2. Cozzens had written Bryant on September 7 (NYPL-BG) that he would attend a literary and art congress in Brussels to discuss international copyright, and wished to be certain that an equitable law protecting authors' rights would meet with Bryant's approval. 3. Bryant's long advocacy of an international copyright law is discussed in 471.2. 84 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT 1057. To Ferdinand E. Field [Roslyn? September 18? 185~] My dear Mr. Field You may feel some interest to hear how we got on in our way to America. After we left you my wife found herself attacked with an influ- enza which made her cough violently and weakened her considerably. In this state she went on board the steamer Africa at Liverpool but the sea- sickness and sea air soon cured the cough and she gained strength during the whole voyage which lasted twelve days. It was the smoothest passage I ever made across the Atlantic-and it was the tenth. I found some acquaint- ances on board, and on the whole they were a pleasant set of people1-all apparently on good-certainly on pacific-terms with each other. It almost seemed as if the sea had been smoothed for our special advantage-for within three days of us followed the steamer Pacific which was tossed about by violent gales nearly all the way. We found Mrs. Godwin and several of our friends on the wharf waiting for us as we landed. Instead of the heat we expected to meet-for the Captain declared it was the warmest passage he had ever made in his life-we found the weather of a pleasant temper- ature-and no weather could be more delightful than the fortnight that has passed since. Julia is quite well, and has just left us on an excursion to the west-Chicago &c. Mrs. Bryant is still on the mending hand. We often talk over the pleasant time we had at your house. We are certainly much obliged to you for the glimpse it gave us of English social life in the middle class-the most virtuous, I suppose, and therefore the most estimable. I feel that I know England much better for the brief res- idence at Evesham, and much better than I could have known it from a much longer residence in a large capital, commercial or manufacturing town. Meantime we are curious to know how things go in your pleasant neighbourhood. Your friend Mr. Kaye2 must by this time have established his quarters at Greenhill 3 and you are taking long smokes and long walks together. Long walks imply long talks of course-since a walk as I have found by experience is the surest and most unfailing provocative of con- versation. The wasps I suppose long ago ate the last of your excellent apricots-the grass on your lawn has thickened under the autumn showers, and the leaves of the trees growing thinner as the year wanes open new views through the branches. Jack, I hope is well, and not yet eaten up by any of the beggar dogs. My wife is anxious to know how you have disposed of Beatrice. Write and tell us all about these things-Give our kind regards to the pleasant acquaintances we made at Evesham. Yrs truly [unsigned] The Impending Crisis 85 MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR (draft) ADDREss: To F E. Field Esq. 1. Besides the Junius Morgans, these included Hiram Barney (1811-1895, Union 1833), law partner of Bryant's friend Benjamin F. Butler (374.1); New York publisher Joseph Wesley Harper (1801-1870); and William David Lewis (1792-1881), a Brooklyn merchant and Russian scholar. Bryant, "Diary, 1857-1858," August 21, 23, 1858. 2. Not further identified. 3. Field's home at Evesham. 1058. To Christiana Gibson [New York? cSeptember 20, 1858] My dear Miss Gibson, Julia has eloped with wm. B. Ogden and Miss Sands and Mr. Tilden- gone to parts unknown-somewhere in the wide west.-1 She cannot possi- bly answer your letter inasmuch as she has not seen it. I write to say that my wife is quite chirk as they say in New England and none the worse-but a little better for getting back to Roslyn. She has at present her sister an in- valid also passing a little time with her-and having no housekeeping to trouble her, finds ample leisure to get well.- She desires me to say that she will depend on your monthly holiday. Her brother Mr. Fairchild 2 has written to her that he will bring his daughter Sarah down immediately in order to place her at your school. He will be in New York as early as the beginning of next week, and will place her with you I suppose as soon as convenient. ... MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR (draft fragment). 1. William B. Ogden (581.2); Julia M. Sands (203.10); Samuel J. Tilden (389.3). A developer of Chicago, and its first mayor in 1837, Ogden subsequently organized and directed several railroads centering in that city. An early friend of the Bryants', he wrote Frances soon after her return from Europe urging that Julia be permitted to join his party in an excursion to the westward, for which, he assured Frances, "I have a free pass for myself and party over the Rail Ways." Ogden to Frances Bryant, September 14, 1858, William Cullen Bryant II. 2. Egbert N. Fairchild (134.2). 1059. To Julia S. Bryant New York Sept. 21 1858 Dear Julia. We got news yesterday of your safe arrival in Chicago, which was the first news we had of you since you ran away. Your mother is getting on. Yesterday she walked to Mr. Willis's cot- tage and back, and next week she intends to come to town for a few days. The weather is heavenly and I think agrees with her. I am at work in town; Mr. Bigelow is building a barn. I have just got Miss Ives's account from Munroe & Co. and have enclosed it to her in a letter. 86 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT Your mother bid me, this morning when I left her, say to you and the rest of your party that she wished them the pleasantest possible time. If the weather is as fine with you as we have it here it cannot be otherwise. My regards to all of them whom I know. Don't let Mr. Tilden make you a Buchanan man, with his glozing speeches. 1 Yours affectionately w c BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR. I. Tilden, long associated with Bryant in the radical wing of the Democratic Party, had not switched with his friend in 1856 to the new Republican Party. Although their political paths diverged thereafter, their friendship persisted throughout the rest of Bryant's life. I 060. To John Bigelow Office of the Evening Post ·wednesday September 29 1858 Dear Mr. Bigelow I could not answer your kind note1 yesterday, as I got it that morning and was obliged to wait till I could see my wife. She is now in town, partly that she may be with me, and partly to consult Dr. Gray, and I am engaged with my dentist. She would be very glad to see Mrs. Bigelow, but the very thought of making journeys and visits fatigues her.2 I was obliged to use the conjugal authority-marital I should say-to get her into town. If she can go any where she thinks she ought to visit her sisters in Berkshire, whom her conscience pricks her for neglecting, but she is putting of[£] that journey and perhaps will not make it this autumn. You will perceive, therefore, that she has some reason for declining, as she does your obliging invitation. She desires her best love to Mrs. Bige- low whom she longs to see, were it only for the brightness of her cheerful countenance. Make my regards also. Yrs truly W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR. I. Unrecovered. 2. In 1857 Bigelow had built a summer home on the Hudson River at Buttermilk Falls (later Highland Falls), near West Point, about sixty miles north of New York City. Bigelow, Retrospections, I, 163. 1061. To Julia S. Bryant New York October 2 1858. Dear Julia. We got your letter from Fond du Lac1 yesterday and are glad to hear that you have had so pleasant an excursion. The weather here has been The Impending Crisis 87 delightful up to the present moment, with the exception of one wet chilly day, and we take for granted that it must have been equally fine where you are-as the quantity of rain being generally less there than here. Your mother is gaining strength gradually notwithstanding she has seen the doctor every day since she came to town. We are at the Everett House- which is quite crowded and too bustling a place for an invalid. Today we return to Roslyn, where I have been cutting away trees and lopping boughs in a manner which gives the place a new aspect. Make our best regards to the Chief of your expedition and to all the others whether officers or privates. Say to Mr. Ogden that he must not let you get out of money, and that he must give you a memorandum of all that he advances for you or to you, that I may return it as soon as I get knowledge of the amount. Yours affectionately W. C. BRYANT. MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR. 1. Unrecovered. 1062. To John Howard Bryant Roslyn October 4 1858. Dear Brother. I was very glad to get your letter1 as it gave me the knowledge of what the Bryants in Princeton are doing and how they all are. With regard to what it says of the crops, the information was so important that I had it put in the Evening Post. We were sorry to hear both of Austins illness2 and that of your wife. You must bring Harriet to the East again, to recruit and go back with a new stock of health. Frances is gradually gaining strength, but is hardly as strong now as when I took her abroad. She was ill as I believe you have been informed for four months at Naples, and when she was well enough to travel, we set out by easy journeys. ... MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR (partial draft) ADDREss: To John H. Bryant. 1. Unrecovered. 2. Bryant's elder brother Austin had been ill for more than eighteen months; see Letter 970. 1063. To George Bancroft1 New York October 11, 1858. Dear Mr. Bancroft. I am amazed at myself when I think how long I have left your kind and cordial note2 unanswered. I thought that I should be able, long ere 88 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT this, to say to you that I had provided myself with some occasional lair in town so that I could dine now and then with a friend-but the only nights, except the first, that I have passed in New York since I came from beyond sea, have been while I was under the hands of a dentist, and the tooth-ache and the state of my masticators generally prevented me from making any calls. My daughter is now at the west and I do not like to leave Mrs. Bryant alone at our country place; but when Julia returns the case will be other- wise, and I shall seize the opportunity to have a good talk with you, and to get my share of those brilliant thoughts of which you have far more than enough for the great work you are writing.3 I am, dear sir, with true regard &c W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: MHS. I. Bryant's long·time friend, historian and diplomat George Bancroft (Vol. I, 15), now living in New York, and an active member of the Sketch Club. 2. On September 15 Bancroft had written Bryant (NYPL-BG), "I long to see you," and asking Bryant to share his "hermit's mead" that afternoon. 3. By 1858 Bancroft had published seven volumes of his History of the United States from the Discovery of the American Continent; the eighth appeared in 1860. Nye, Bancroft, p. 198. 1064. To RichardS. Willis Roslyn, October lith, 1858 My dear Mr. Willis:- I am glad that you think of doing honor to the memory of your late excellent wife, 1 by putting into a volume the testimonials to her worth, in the hope that they may hereafter awaken in her children and other descend- ants a desire to imitate her example. It appears to me, that I have scarce ever known a character, the elements of which were so happily propor- tioned and combined, as a preparation for ingrafting on it the graces and virtues of a highly cultivated moral and religious nature. An instinctive benevolence, which embraced all her fellow-creatures, strong domestic af- fections, freedom from all taint of hatred or envy, a great unwillingness to believe ill or speak ill of others, the most amiable docility, an earnest desire to obey all the calls of duty, the most cheerful contentment in the ordinary condition of life, and the sweetest patience under adverse circum- stances, were always remarkable in her daily life; and it seemed to me that, with the advance of years, these qualities acquired consistency and strength, and ripened into a more beautiful and harmonious whole. I was, as you know, in a foreign land when I was startled with the news of her premature death, the circumstances of which were fully related to me. It then occurred to me, that if such a calamity could admit of conso- lation, her friends must have found it in the calm religious resignation The Impending Crisis 89 with which she gave up a life which had been so happy, meeting death as an event of which she had no fear, and making for it the most wise, thought- ful, and affectionate dispositions. It seems, therefore, in the highest degree proper, that, cherishing her memory as you do, you should seek to give it some more permanent reposi- tory than mere personal recollection, which must pass away with the lives of those who were so fortunate as to have known her. As one of that num- ber, I shall be happy if my testimony to her virtues shall be thought worthy to be included in the memorial you are preparing.2 I am dear sir, With great regard and esteem, WM. C. BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: Unrecovered TEXT: Memorial of Jessie Willis: Prepared for Her Little Daughters, Annie, Blanche and Jessie, by Their Father (New York, April 1858 [for private circulation]), pp. 14-15 ADDRESS: R. Storrs Willis, Esq. I. See Letter 1027. 2. See descriptive note. 1065. To Richard H. Dana1 New York October 13, 1858. Dear Dana. I acknowledge that I got your letter written to me in Europe2-but I remember it was received at a time when I had not much time to answer it, and, as often happens, the thing which should have been done at the mo- ment, by being put off was not done at all. I have no other excuse to make, and acknowledge that this is a very weak one. Frances, I am glad to say is gradually improving in health and with her health she is regaining her cheerfulness. Perhaps she is hardly as strong yet, as when I took her abroad, but if she makes the same progress as she has done since she began to recover, I am sure she will be better than she has been at any time for more than three years past. I suppose you know that she was ill with a nervous fever at Naples-ill for four months and at death's door. Her physician here tells her that if she finds herself entirely recovered from the effect of that sickness at the end of a year it will be as much as she has a right to expect. I am glad to hear so good an account of Charlotte's3 health, though I should have had more satisfaction in hearing that her accident had even- tually restored her health, as has happened in some instances of which I have lately heard-two for example in which an inveterate dispepsia was cured by the patients being thrown out of a waggon and severely hurt. Give her my kind regards-my wife I am sure would send hers if she were here, but she is in the country. Of your own health, and what it has been for a long time past you say nothing. Do not forget it the next time you 90 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT write. For my own part, I have nothing to complain of on that score. What a silly sentence is this last-as if I had a right to complain of ill health in any other than a medical sense. You speak of the beauty of your autumn woods. I wish I were with you a day or two by the side of the dashing sea and in sight of the gay groves of your coast. On Long Island the leaves have just begun to put on a sallow look and do not yet show much of the crimson and yellow. In two or three days however, the change must come. They have been engraving Durand's likeness of me. Durand himself put the finishing touches to the work, and from his hands it comes, so some of my friends say, a better likeness than the original painting.4 I long to see your face again. How shall this be managed? Truly yours W. C. BRYANT. MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR ENDORSED: wm. c. Bryant, Oct f13f5[8] Answered. I. Richard Henry Dana, Sr. (See Vol. I, 13). 2. Unrecovered. 3. Dana's unmarried daughter; see 282.5; Letter 1145. 4. See 867.2. 1066. To John Bigelow New York Oct 20, 1858 Dear Mr. Bigelow My wife wants to see Mrs Bigelow, before she goes to Europe.1 Why can you not bring her out to Roslyn[?] If it were only for a night she could send you up to the Branch at noon. She bid me ask you this question this morning but I forgot it till the moment you were gone.- Any day will be all the same to her and to me. Yrs truly W C BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-Bigelow. I. On November 13, 1858, the Bige1ows sailed for Europe, to be gone until June 11, 1860. Bigelow, Retrospections, I, 181, 289. 1067. To an Unidentified Correspondent New York, October 20, 1858. I approve in the highest degree of the plan to improve the condition of the New York females, by furnishing them with the means of obtaining a more useful education, and providing for them a reading room and library.1 WM. c. BRYANT The Impending Crisis 91 MANUSCRIPT: Unrecovered TEXT: Undated newspaper clipping, probably from EP. I. Bryant was one of a number of prominent New Yorkers, among them Henry Ward Beecher, Peter Cooper, and Horace Greeley, who supported a proposal for a "first-class Female Library" which was to be discussed at a meeting on October 26, the topic of which was "The Necessity of Mental Culture in Women." See descriptive note. 1068. To John G. Chapman New York Nov 8, 1858. My dear sir I have received the photographs which I left with you together with one for Miss Ives and thank you for the attention. Mr. Young to whom they were forwarded with some other things sent them to me three weeks since. There were some engravings purchased at the Government Office, which I supposed would be sent me at the same time and as I do not get them, I fear that some mischance may have happened to them on the way. They were bought under your advice as you may remember-and consisted of Raphael's Spasimo di Sicilia, the Madonna della Seggiola, a Madonna del' Pesce, a Teologia and Michael and the Dragon. I think there was an- other-bought afterwards-but I do not recollect what. Miss Ives had sev- eral which were to come with mine-and among them was Titians Assump- tion of the Virgin and Guido's Aurora. Please write me about them and let me know whether they have been sent. My wife has been getting better ever since you saw her. She finds her native air healing, but the process of recovering strength is very slow- Dr. Gray, her physician tells her that a year is not too long to repair the mischief done by such an illness. Julia is very well and has just returned from a visit to Berkshire, but this has been the shortest of her wanderings since her re- turn. A few days after we got to our home in the country-our little place at Roslyn-she set out with a party of nine on an expedition to parts which when you lived in the country were unknown-to Oshkosh and such places which a few years ago were without a name, and are now flourishing towns and villages. Miss Ives I hear has been very well since her return. The Century is prosperous and plethoric-it consists of 250 members now and the new place in Fifteenth Street is very convenient and very popu- lar. For me there are quite too many strange figures among them. I begin to find myself a little homesick when I visit it and pine for "the old familiar faces." 1 Mr. Verplanck however is as faithful as ever in his at- tendance and I believe makes aquaintance with all the new people as they come in.2 Leupp was very well when I saw him last. Goudie is cheerfully waiting for the time when his eyes are to be couched, and John Durand is going on perseveringly with the Crayon which he says is on the gaining hand. His father's picture of me has been admirably engraved by Jones3 with some help I believe from the painter himself. ... 92 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR (draft). I. Charles Lamb, The Old Familiar Faces. 2. In 1857 Bryant's old friend and literary collaborator Gulian C. Verplanck (Vol. I, 15) had been elected president of the Century Association. Robert W. July, The Essential New Yorker: Gulian Crommelin Verplanck (Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press, 1951), p. 252. 3. Alfred Jones (867.2). 1069. To Robert C. Waterston New York November 11, 1858. Dear Mr. Waterston. We have seen an account of your arrival in Boston, but can learn noth- ing more. Both my wife and myself and Julia besides, would be very glad to hear that you and Mrs. Waterston had reached home in health, from that sojourn in foreign countries, in part so pleasant and cheerful, and in part overshadowed with so dark a cloud of sorrow. For a single line, letting us know what sort of passage you had, and how you both are now, we should thank you with all our hearts. We were greatly distressed the other morning at the news we heard, of an accident, threatening to be fatal, which happened to Mr. Quincy; 1 and we immediately thought how it must afflict Mrs. Waterston and your- self, but the next intelligence from Boston relieved us. Mrs. Bryant, I am happy to be able to say, continues to gain strength, though very slowly. Julia is very well; and both unite with me in desiring every expression of kind regards to Mrs. Waterston and yourself. I am, dear sir, faithfully yours WMC. BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: UVa. I. Mrs. Waterston's father, Josiah Quincy (425.1) survived this accident, dying in 1864 at the age of ninety-two. 1070. To Victor Mercier1 New York 12 Novembre 1858. Mon cher Monsieur. Monsieur J. Bigelow mon associe dans le redaction de I' Evening Post vous remettra cette lettre. 11 voyage en Europe avec sa femme, charmante personne, et leurs enfan[t]s. Je sollicite pour lui cet accueil bienveillant que vous m'avez accorde 2 .... MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR (draft fragment) ADDRESS: A Monsieur Mercier. I. See Letter 540. 2. "My dear sir. Mr. J. Bigelow, my associate in editing the Evening Post, will hand you this letter. He travels in Europe with his wife, a charming person, and their chil- dren. I beg for him that kind welcome which you have granted me. ..." The Impending Crisis 95 1071. To an Unidentified Correspondent Office of the Evening Post December lOth 1858. The bearer of this Manton Marble Esqre. has been employed for nine months in the editorial department of the Evening Post, during three of which I have been actively concerned in the conduct of the paper. I have found him exceedingly serviceable,-well educated well informed, punc- tual, diligent, and with the capacity of bringing his information to bear upon any given subject with readiness and despatch. So far as I know and believe his habits of life are without reproach. I consider him as well qualified to take charge of any province of the political or literary de- partment of a newspaper. He writes with fluency, clearness, correctness, and occasionally elegance; he is well acquainted with the politics of the day and makes up a newspaper judiciously and with despatch.1 WMC. BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: LC ENDORSED: From I wm Cullen Bryant, J (Evening Post). I. Manton Malone Marble (1835-1917) had apparently been engaged by John Bigelow in March 1858 during Bryant's absence abroad. This generous estimate of Marble's journalistic abilities is silent on a point which must have been crucial in the severance from the EP's editorial desk of this young assistant whose Democratic political bias later made him an outspoken critic of Lincoln's conduct of the Civil War, from the day in 1862 when he took control of the heretofore Republican New York World. Isaac Henderson to Bryant, June 8, 1858, Homestead Collection; John Bigelow to Henderson, December 27, 1858, NYPL-BG; Nevins, Evening Post, p. 302; Mott, Ameri- can journalism, p. 351. 1072. To Daniel Coit Gilman Office of the Evening Post, New York, Deer. lith 1858. Dr. sir We have no doubt that articles such as these your letter of the IQth inst refers to might be made occasionally instructive & entertaining & we should like to print such, if on being received they should be approved by our Editors.1 The compensation which we have been in the habit of allowing for correspondence of the sort has been varied in the nature & importance of the subjects. If you should send us anything we will if we can meet your wishes We have the honour to be Your obdt servts. W C BRYANT Co.2 MANUSCRIPT: JHUL ADDRESS: Danl. C. Gilman 1 Yale College Liby. 1. It has not been determined whether any contributions from Gilman (840.1), then librarian of Yale College, appeared in the EP. His letter is unrecovered. 2. This letter is not in Bryant's handwriting. 94 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT 1073. To Julia S. Bryant Office of the Evening Post New York, Dec 21 1858 Dear Julia. I send with this a basket on which is attached a coat of mine, and the basket contains some things put up by your mother which she does not want opened till she comes. All are well at Roslyn. I shall go out this after- noon again. The boy will bring any message or letter that you wish sent out. Yours affectionately w c BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR. 1074. ToW. C. Manning1 New York January 12, 1859. Sir. I have not leisure to write to you at any length on the subject of your letter, but I can say that I do not agree with Schlegel.2 All subjects that af- fect the heart and the imagination are proper subjects for poetry, and Chris- tianity among the rest. I am, sir, respectfully yours W. C. BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-Thomas F. Madigan Collection. I. Unidentified. 2. Probably Friedrich von Schlegel (1772-1829), German philosopher and literary critic. Manning's letter is unrecovered. 1075. To William Henry Appleton1 New York January 22, 1859. My dear sir. I agree that the percentage I am to receive on the sale of my poems2- 1500 copies to the Common School Libraries of Ohio may be calculated upon a 75 cts. book. Yours truly W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: Indiana University Library ADDRESS: wm H Appleton Esqre. ENDORSED: I agree to a like I arrangement in reference I to my book I Fitz-Greene Halleck 1 New York Jany 22, '59; W. C. Bryant I and I Fitz Greene Halleck 1 agreement for I percentage on I Poems to Ohio I Library- I Jany 22nd I 59. I. William Henry Appleton (1814-1899) was then head of D. Appleton & Co., publishers since 1854 of Bryant's collected poems. See 868.4. The Impending Crisis 95 2. The 1854 edition of the Poems, which had been reprinted annually since that year. See The Poetical Works of William Cullen Bryant, Roslyn ed. (New York: D. Appleton, 1907), p.1xxxix. 1076. To Samuel A. Allibone New York February 1, 1859. Dear sir. I either overlooked or quite too soon forgot the request at the close of your note accompanying the first volume of your excellent Dictionary of English Literature, 1 that I should inform you of its coming to my hands, and I write to apologize for a neglect of which I am now made sensible on reading the note again. The opinion I formed of your work on looking over some of the first sheets I have found no cause to modify, except as it has risen in my esteem. I regard it as one of the best books of reference ever compiled, and have no fear that the public will fail properly to acknowledge its merit. I am, sir, very truly yours W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: HEHL ADDRESS: S. Austin Allibone Esq. DOCKETED: W. C. Bryant. I. See 916.1. Allibone's note is unrecovered. 1077. To John Bigelow New York February 15, 1859. My dear Mr. Bigelow. I take it for granted that you wonder I have not written to you before. The plain truth is that I have been so much taken up with looking to the Evening Post, that I have conceived an absolute disgust for other tasks, but being at Roslyn for a day-though my letter is dated at New York, and hav- ing a spare hour on my hands I employ it to do what I own I ought to have done before. Mr. Henderson has written to you I understand concerning the finan- cial condition of the Evening Post and concerning some arrangements made for carrying on the paper during your absence, but there is yet some- thing to be said. Since the November dividend was made the weekly and semi-weekly papers have been gradually increasing circulation. The daily paper holds its own but does not increase. One reason of this may be that the [New York] Commercial [Advertiser] is every day brought to the street before our door and sold for a penny. A great effort is made to get it out a little earlier than the Evening Post, and so to anticipate us on the market. The effect of this maneuver is visible in the sales of the Commercial which take place under our eyes, but though it may obstruct the increase of our 96 LEITERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT circulation it does not lessen it.1 The collections-the receipts of the paper, are rather better than they were before the dividend. As for the advertis- ing it has become a perfect nuisance. The trouble began about the end of November and ever since that time there has been a continual war be- tween the composing room and the editor's room. After the holidays we fancied that the press of advertisements would be over, but we were mis- taken; the advertisers have not relented a whit. At present Mr. Henderson is engaged in introducing a method of putting printed superscriptions on all the papers sent by mail, by means of a machine which sticks the printed slip on the wrapper as fast as a nail machine turns out cut nails, and effects a great saving in clerk hire. As soon as this arrangement is effected, we are to take up the question of enlarging the paper which I fear is unavoidable. I am sorry that I did not know earlier what opinion you had of Hans- com. As soon as I saw your letters relating to him I was for dismissing him immediately as a man who had imposed upon us by a false statement. There were but four of five weeks remaining however of the session, and Mr. Henderson seemed quite averse to having a quarrel with the man, so I yielded. I should not have employed him if Mr. Thayer2 had not been very confident that he had been promised employment as a correspondent for the Evening Post at this session of Congress.3 As for Dr. Wilder I have given him the preference as a correspondent at Albany partly because I found that he was personally acquainted with almost every member of both houses of the legislature, and many of the public officers and partly on account of his great industry. He has done an infinite deal of work for us while at Albany, sending us, besides his letters, the substance of reports and abstracts of bills, which require a great deal of time to make out and which in the crowded state of our columns are in- valuable to us.4 As to politics, the Republican party is in excellent spirits and full of hope. Buchanan is more feebly supported and more generally despised than when you were here. Douglas has been gravitating about as fast, and now that he has got back to his old allegiance the Southern politicians give themselves very little trouble about him and the general opinion seems to be that he will have to stay in the ranks. The thirty million dollars which it is proposed to give Buchanan,5 he will not get; the Douglas democrats understand that it will be used against their leader in the next election-at all events that he can have no good of it- The Times at last has come out against it on the ground that it is to be spent here at home. There will be many southern votes against it. The tariff it is thought is safe for this session also. On the whole less mischief will be done than there was reason a few weeks since to fear. Meanwhile people talk of Seward and Banks as competitors for the Republican nomination for the Presidency,6 and nearly as little is said about Fremont 7 as you were in the habit of saying before you went away. The Impending Crisis 97 For the rest you will find it all in the Evening Post. I have had the honor of a visit from Mrs. Cunningham, who came to ask the name of her libeller in the E. P. that she might prosecute him.8 Kind regards to Mrs. Bigelow and congratulations that she has not to endure such a villa[i]nous winter as we have here. Take your own time to see the Old World-our part of the New Prospect. Yrs truly W C BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR DOCKETED: W. C. Bryant & Co f Feby 1859. I. The combined circulation of the EP's three editions in June 1858 was 12,334 copies. Bigelow to Bryant, June 12, 1858, NYPL-BG. 2. WilliamS. Thayer (924.4), then managing editor of the EP. 3. Hanscom has not been further identified. 4. Alexander Wilder (1823-1908, M.D. Syracuse Medical College 1850) was em- ployed by the EP for thirteen years. As its correspondent at Albany he was, Bryant com- mented (Letter 1087), "a perfect Hercules of a lobby member." Wilder was later on the faculties of several medical colleges, and the author of books with such whimsical titles as New Platonism and Alchemy (1869) and Vaccination, a Medical Fallacy (1875). 5. To negotiate the purchase of Cuba from Spain; see Nevins, Emergence of Lin- coln, I, 445-449. Of Buchanan's proposal, Bryant wrote, "A bill appropriating thirty million to buy the moon would not be a more brainless project." EP, January 17, 1859. 6. William H. Seward (753.3); Nathaniel Prentiss Banks (1816-1894), former Demo- cratic congressman, and in 1859 Republican governor of Massachusetts. 7. John C. Fremont (Letter 958). 8. On the night of January 30, 1857, a Dr. Harvey Burdell had been murdered at 21 Bond Street, New York. One Emma Augustus Cunningham, then known as Mrs. Cunningham-Burden, was tried and acquitted of the crime. Subsequently, the New York surrogate found her not to be Burdell's wife, and denied her the right to his estate; she then dropped from public notice. Meanwhile, two writers for the EP, city editor Alfred C. Hills and Alfred J. Marsh, wrote a series of investigative articles for the paper entitled "Matrimonial Brokerage in the Metropolis," and in February 1859 devoted three of these to the suspicious and probably criminal activities of Mrs. Cun- ningham at the house of a marriage broker, Jessie Willis, at 18 West 43rd Stret. EP, February 11, 12, 14, 1859. On March 3, perhaps as a result of Mrs. Cunningham's call on Bryant and threat to prosecute the writers, the EP printed sworn affidavits by Hills and Marsh attesting the truth of their charges. 1078. To Cyrus Bryant New York Feb. 17th. 1859. Dear Brother. Yesterday I mailed to your address the Regulations of the Military Academy which I obtained by writing to Professor Weir of West Point. When Cullen comes to the Academy you must send him down to see us, and if you were to come with him so much the better.1 Of my own visit to Illinois in the Spring I can say nothing at present, although I think it not improbable that I may come. I am now consider- 98 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT ably occupied with the paper, but I do not mean to be so much confined to business as I have been since I returned from Europe. When the spring comes on, however, I shall probably be much engaged with my place. I am looking about for a regular gardener to employ along with the farmer whom I have had for several years. With regard to Pike's Peak, and the gold mines, it is probably true that gold is to be found there, but I never knew much good to come from hunting for gold yet. It is too much like gambling; the pursuit is apt to un- settle men for any thing else, and the instances of those who have en- riched themselves by it are very few. I have known a great many instances of persons to whom the pursuit turned out a real misfortune. For my part I should as soon think of making my fortune by angling in Bureau River.2 We are all now in town. I have bought a house for Fanny and we are all with her.3 My wife I think is slowly getting a little strength, but is not in very good health yet. Her principal difficulties are debility and weak nerves. Noise, loud talking, bustle, hurry, and many things to think of at once, always distress her. Julia is very well, and all the rest are in comfort- able health. Our winter here has been I think much like yours-rather mild on the whole, with some intensely cold days and a perpetual shifting from rain and thaw to hard frost. It is not often that we have a season so changeable. The Evening Post is pretty successful. Mr. Bigelow as I suppose you know has gone to Europe, and I believe is now in Rome, with his family. Godwin has come into the office to help me.4 My regards to your wife and the young folks. Yours affectionately W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: Andrew B. Myers ADDRESS: C. Bryant Esqre. I. Failing of an appointment to West Point in 1859, because of "political evasions from Washington," Cyrus Bryant's third son, Cullen (1839-1909), entered the United States Military Academy in June 1860, graduating in 1864 as a second lieutenant in ordnance. Having served in various arsenals from Maine to California, he retired from the army in 1894. Cyrus to Cullen Bryant, April 14, 1859, and June 4, 1860, NYPL-GR; Forty-First Annual Reunion of the Association of the Graduates of the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York, june J4ill. 1910 (Saginaw, Michigan, 1910), pp. 91-92. For Robert W. Weir, see 203.12; Letter 279. 2. A small tributary of the Illinois River running through Princeton, Illinois. For a description of the "irrational and irresistible stampede" to Pike's Peak, Colorado, in 1858-1859, see Nevins, Emergence of Lincoln, I, 305-308. Bryant's scorn for such a pur- suit anticipates that of Henry David Thoreau in "Life Without Principle" (1863): "The ways by which you may get money almost without exception lead downward. ... The gold-digger in the ravines of the mountains is as much a gambler as his fellow in the saloons of San Francisco." 3. At 82 East Sixteenth Street, New York. Frances Bryant to Ferdinand Field, January 21, 1859, NYPL-GR; Letter 1210. 4. Parke Godwin had left the employ of the EP in 1846; see 559.4. The Impending Crisis 99 1079. To John Howard Bryant [New York? cFebruary 1859)1 ... to take charge of my garden, and if he were with a good practical gardener for a year I think he would be nearly his equal. Mr. Cline remains on the place; he goes into the cottage close to our house, and will continue to occupy his leisure moments on the place. He is a very industrious man, conscientious almost to an excess, and very fond of the culture of flowers and choice plants. He acts as a kind of steward to me, is very serviceable particularly when I am absent and saves me a great deal of trouble. You speak of coming to New York when the spring opens. If you do you will probably find us already in the country, but the house in town will be open, and Fanny and her children will probably be there. It may be that I shall run out to Illinois next season whether you come or not, but I have formed no certain plan of that sort. Seeing the head of Fremont on your letter reminds me of politics and the next President. Buchanan, weakest of men as he is, has done more to break up his party than I could possibly have expected, and the chances look very promising for a Republican President after the next election. Douglas has been, it seems to me his own executioner; he has pulled down the guillotine upon his own neck. He has gone back to his old allegiance, but will always be distrusted by those from whom he separated for a time. Such a man as Hammond 2 would be much better supported at the South than Douglas, and equally well at the North. It seems to me that the popu- larity of Douglas is wholly at an end in every part of the Union, except it be among his friends in Illinois. He is looked upon as a man without either convictions or party fidelity-and one of these a man must have to be the leader that Douglas aspires to be. With regard to Fremont there is a disposition in this quarter to leave him where he is. I have heard some things about him since my return which have gone far to reconcile me to his ill success in the election of 1856. Many of those who were his warmest friends are cool towards him. Chase3 would be the best man; but I am afraid that he cannot be nomi- nated. Seward and his friends are exceedingly anxious to get the nomina- tion for him. His unconscientious prodigality in dispensing the public money is the greatest objection to him. There are many who talk of Banks, against whom the sin of having been a Native American will prejudice many.4 I hope we shall get a wise and good man. Frederick Law Olmsted,5 the Superintendant of the Central Park in our city, who is a man of great administrative capacity, who selects all his subordinates and agents with an instinctive wisdom, and who does not allow a dollar of the public money to be paid out except for value received, would be an infinitely better President than we have had since Van Buren,6 but nobody will think of nominating him, and few would know whom they were voting for when they gave him their suffrage. 100 LEITERS oF WILLIAM CuLLEN BRYANT Remember me kindly to Harriet and Elijah. We expected to see Sarah Olds on her return from Boston and were disappointed that she did not take New York [in?] her way-all of us- Will you say this to Louisa? 7 Yours affectionately WMC.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: Knox College Library ADDREss: Jno H Bryant Esqre. 1. The first part of this letter is seemingly lost. It is dated conjecturally. 2. James Henry Hammond (1807-1864, South Carolina College 1825), a planter and southern nationalist, was a United States senator from South Carolina, 1857-1860. 3. Salmon P. Chase of Ohio (Letter 753). 4. The resurgence of anti-foreign and anti-Catholic feeling in the early 1850s had found political expression in a Native American, or "Know-Nothing," Party which in 1856 chose Millard Fillmore (753.4) as its candidate for President. Banks, earlier a Democrat, but by 1856 a Republican, had for a time shown Know-Nothing leanings. Nevins, Emergence of Lincoln, II, 237; Ordeal, II, 323-332, 414, 467. 5_ See 406.4. 6. Martin Van Buren served one term as President, from 1837 to 1841. 7. Sarah Snell Olds was the nineteen-year-old daughter of Bryant's sister Charity Louisa (Mrs. Justin H. Olds). 1080. To George Harvey1 New York March 2, 1859. My dear sir. I very much regret that I did not take more pains to find you out when I was in London, and I regret it all the more since I have received your obliging letter2 in which you speak of the unsuccessful attempt you made to find my lodgings. I was much occupied in attending to the com- fort and entertainment of my wife who was recovering from a nervous fever which had held her a prisoner during four months at Naples, and had brought her to the brink of the grave. I was required to be much with her, and was not without frequent apprehensions of a relapse, a danger which constantly menaced her during her convalescence. She is not even yet well, though so long a time has elapsed; and yet I think she mends slowly. All the benefit to which I am entitled from this apology, I hope you will gen- erously allow me. I certainly do not deserve to be regarded as guilty of premeditated neglect of one who has shown himself so deserving of my respect and esteem. You allude in your letter to your system of measuring values and super- seding the present monetary system of the world. I agree with you fully that if the scheme you propose be ever so practicable, it is one which must make slow progress in the world. You have done your part in presenting to the world the essential idea on which it is founded, and if it is ever adopted hereafter you will receive the credit of being its discoverer, inventor, or author,-whichever title may be best applied to him in [whose ]3 mind it had its birth. In the mean time it seems to me that the abstract nature of the The Impending Crisis 101 propositions in which your system is expressed is one of the reasons why the public give it no more attention. There are many minds to whom all ideas, more particularly new ideas enunciated in this manner are mere Sanscrit; they only understand them when they see them in the concrete; when they are illustrated to their senses by some actual example. If you could show them a community ever so small transacting their business according to your system, and employing with convenience and advantage the tokens by which, according to that system, values are expressed they would for the first time form a rational idea of its nature and perhaps be willing seri- ously to consider its merits.4 I am glad in the mean time to learn that you are engaged in a business which as it gives you constant occupation, must I infer bring its pecuniary rewards. You have labored in a noble cause, that of peace and good will between two great nations, and have fairly earned a title to bestow some attention on your private affairs. I assure you that you will always have my kindest wishes, and that I shall always rejoice to hear of your prosperity. Public affairs have got into what seems to me a bad way in this country. The man who is now our President has less of the respect of his fellow citizens than any Chief Magistrate who has preceded him and less apparent regard for right and justice either in his domestic administration or in the management of our relations with other governments. My wife desires her kind regards to you. I am, dear sir, very truly yours WM. C. BRYANT MANUSCRIPTS: DuU (final); NYPL-GR (draft) ADDREss: Geo. Harvey Esqre. I. An English artist and economist who spent many years painting in the United States. See 553.2. 2. Unrecovered. 3. Bryant mistakenly wrote "its." 4. Harvey seems not to have presented his theories of monetary reform in a separate publication, but may have developed them in periodical form. 1081. To E. B. Seevoss and Others 1 New York March 10, 1859. Gentlemen. When I got your polite invitation to be present at the delivery of Mr. Everett's Oration this evening2 I was uncertain whether I might not be then out of town; and afterwards it escaped my recollection that you de- sired an early reply. If it be not too late I shall be happy to avail myself of the opportunity you offer. I am, gentlemen, very respectfully yours W.C.BRYANT 102 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: Andrew B. Myers ADDRESS: Messrs E. B. Seevoss 1 C. E. K. Sherman 1 W. H. Wickham. 1. The addressees were apparently members of the program committee of the Mercantile Library Association of New York. They have not been further identified individually. 2. On March 9 the EP announced that Edward Everett (540.9) would deliver an oration that evening on Benjamin Franklin, under the auspices of the Mercantile Li- brary Association, at the Academy of Music. Bryant seems to have misdated his letter. 1082. To Leonice M.S. Moulton New York March 17, 1859 I cannot affect to misunderstand the riddle in your note 1... -its flattering solution is so obvious. The engraving of which you speak is not to be had in any of the shops. The Century Club is the publisher and the person who has the charge of it is Mr. John Durand a son of the artist and editor of the Crayon, whose office is 373 Broadway 2 .... MANUSCRIPT: Ridgely Family Collection TEXT: Hoyt, "Bryant Correspondence (I)," 69. 1. Unrecovered. 2. This was the engraving of Durand's portrait of Bryant referred to in Letter 1065. 1083. To an Unidentified Correspondent New York March 26, 1859. Sir Absence from town has prevented me from answering your letter be- fore this evening. I have no objection to the use of my name in an invitation to the Revd. Mr. Lord to give a course of Historical Lectures in this city. 1 I am, sir, respectfully yours W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: Dartmouth College Library. 1. Probably John Lord (1810-1894, Dartmouth 1833), a historical lecturer who, in 1884-1896, published a series of books entitled Beacon Lights of History. No report of lectures by Lord in New York has been found. 1084. To Henry Lillie Pierce and Others1 New York April 1st 1859 Gentlemen. I thank you for inviting me to the festival you are about to hold in honor of the memory of Jefferson. 2 You do well to observe the birth day of that great man, one of the wisest political philosophers of his time,-wiser, I think, than any who lived in the times before him-one who saw deeper The Impending Crisis 103 into the principles of government than his contemporaries knew. I should be most happy to unite with you in this commemoration, but am withheld by my various occupations. I am gentlemen with great regard &c. W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: UVa ADDREss: Messrs Henry L. Pierce 1 and others-members I of the Committee. PUBLISHED: Herman L. Spivey, "William Cullen Bryant Changes His Mind: An Unpublished Letter about Thomas Jefferson," New England Quarterly, 22 (December 1949), 528-529. I. Henry Lillie Pierce (1825-1896), a cocoa manufacturer and liberal Republican Massachusetts legislator, served as mayor of Boston in 1872 and 1879. He and his com- mittee were apparently members of the Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation. 2. Pierce's letter of invitation is unrecovered. 1085. To Frances D. Stabler Office of the Evening Post New York, April 1st 1859. Madam. The verses enclosed in your note are above the ordinary character of newspaper poetry and are inserted in the Evening Post with pleasure.1 We are not in the habit of paying for literary matter but I have directed the paper to be sent to your address and any thing from the same source will be always welcome. Respectfully &c. W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: LC ADDREss: Miss Frances D. Stabler 1 Sandy Spring 1 Montgomery County I Maryland POSTMARK: [illegible]. I. These verses have not been located in the EP. Their author has not been further identified. 1086. To Julia S. Bryant Roslyn April 4th. 1859. Dear Julia. I did not recollect till I was on my way to Roslyn that I had left the shrubs which I brought from Roslyn heeled up, in the border of the back- yard in Sixteenth Street. Will you see that they are planted? The magnolia of Soulange[ana] is just ready to open its flowers. Yrs affectionately W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR. 104 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT 1087. To John Bigelow Roslyn Long Island April 11th 1859. Dear Mr. Bigelow I take it for granted that you would like to hear from me again by this time respecting the condition of the Evening Post. A single circumstance will perhaps enable you to form as good an idea of how we stand as a sheet- full of statistics. Mr. Henderson puts on a serene look in which satisfaction is mingled with resignation and looking into the air says quietly "The Evening Post is prosperous-very prosperous." From the beginning of December our paper has been staggering under the burden of advertisements. "After the holidays," said Mr. Dithmar,l "the advertisements will begin to fall off," but the holidays went over and the advertisers showed no symptoms of relenting. Then came the advertise- ments of the incorporated companies,-insurance companies and others and the longer we went on the greater was the press of advertising. The Evening Post has not been edited from the time you went away till within a few days, except by the advertisers. For reading matter we gave only what they left us room for and that was very little. At last the necessity of enlarging the paper pressed so hard upon us, that we had no alternative, and we took the instant resolution to enlarge. But first we had a careful investigation made, the different methods of enlargement discussed and the cost estimated. We had an experienced man from Hoe's2 several days in our press room. We ascertained that to give our paper the form of the Tribune and Times would involve a cost of three thousand dollars, new turtles in that case being necessary. To lengthen the columns of the paper, merely, would not give us additional room enough. We chose the cheapest method of enlargement, that of giving an additional column to each page, and last week the change went into effect. The paper may now be said to be edited, yet we have not an inch too much room and before you get back I shall not be surprized if we have to lengthen the columns to the utmost capacity of the frames that contain them. Until Congress rose I was constant in my attendance at the office, working hard and as steadily as I ever did. At present I am hiding. The suit of Forrest against N. P. Willis for a libel is in court and Forrest wants me for a witness; so I find it convenient to be out of the way as I do not want to be questioned about the old difficulties between Forrest and his wife.3 The part taken by the4 Evening Post in regard to the assassination of Key by Sickles has been, thus far at least, a fortunate thing for the Evening Post. The other journals were silent, or spoke in favor of the act, and all of them admitted the one-sided accounts of the friends of Sickles in Washington. To me it seemed imperative that something should be said of a decided character and instantly. I thought of obeying my conscience in the matter but it happens that what was said struck a vein in the public mind and the waters gushed up, a perfect flood. It happened to be the very thing that the The Impending Crisis 105 best, and I verily5 believe, by much the largest part of the community was waiting for. 6 You will have seen that the bill to increase the compensation for legal advertisements has been lost in the Senate after passing the Assembly of the State. It was not lost for want of pushing. Wilder according to all accounts is a perfect Hercules of a lobby member-the most popular man about the capital, sleeping by turns with the different members, and Thayer was there a considerable part of the time to help him. Yet I was uncomfortable all the while at the idea of having a bill before the legislature from which if it passed I was to derive a personal advantage, and I was quite relieved when I saw that it was defeated. Every thing else is going on well at the office. Your letters are read with interest and much enquired for. There is a disposition very general among readers to find fault with the author for not giving more of them.7 After a sour winter we have had a March like May, but rather severe influenzas have prevailed. Julia I heard a day or two since was quite ill with that complaint. My wife gradually improves in health. I do not hear that any of your many friends are ill. In politics I can tell you of nothing which is not in the newspapers. Sensible men are congratulating each other that there was no Post Office Appropriation Act-which puts the depart- ment upon a course of some economy. Kindest greetings to Mrs. Bigelow, who I doubt not en joys herself much in Rome. My wife and daughter would send their best love if with me. Very truly &c &c \\1 C BRYANT P.S. New York April 12.- The advertisement bill, I find has been fished up and passed. The fates would have it so.8 MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR. I. The German Henry Dithmar was foreman of the EP"s composing room. Nevins, Evening Post, pp. 342-343, 422. 2. Robert Hoe & Co., makers of printing presses. See 705.5. 3. The actor Edwin Forrest and his former wife, Catherine Sinclair Forrest (see 665.5). 4. Bryant mistakenly wrote "its." 5. Bryant mistakenly wrote "very." 6. On February 27, 1859, United States district attorney Philip Barton Key (1819?- 1859) was shot to death in Lafayette Square, Washington, by New York congressman Daniel Edgar Sickles (1819-1914), to whose wife Key had paid open attention. Sickles was later acquitted on the ground of temporary insanity. Nevins, Emergence of Lincoln, I, 432. Bryant urged editorially that even the admitted unfaithfulness of Sickles' young wife was no excuse for coldblooded murder by this "profligate" who, "to the discredit of this city, is one of its representatives in Congress," and who "has in his career reached the stage of assassination, and dipped his hands in human blood." EP, February 28 and March 1, 1859. 7. Letters from Bigelow, signed "J. B.," were printed often in the EP during 1859 and early 1860, and were helpful to Bryant in writing on European affairs. 106 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT 8. However, no such bill was made into law during the eighty-second session of the New York State Legislature, which was adjourned on April 19, 1859. Information from the Reference Services of the New York State Library. 1088. To Richard H. Dana Office of the Evening Post New York, April 15th, 1859 Dear Dana, I have this moment got your letter1 on my return from the country, and before I go to work, I answer it on the first piece of paper that comes to hand. You ask what can be done to place a statue to Cooper in New York. Nothing. We had you may remember, some years since a great public meet- ing in the city at which Webster presided. I delivered a sort of address and distinguished men made speeches, and contributions were obtained and a treasurer appointed.2 Dr. Griswold was the principal getter up of the affair. A few hundred dollars were subscribed and we thought we should have a monument-but there the matter ended. A few weeks since Mr. Stevens the treasurer,3 with the assent of the principal subscribers, and with my con- currence, paid over the money to the persons concerned in getting up the monument at Cooperstown. That seemed to be a live undertaking, while this at New York was dead beyond hope of revival for the present at least. Sometime hereafter, I have no doubt the people of this city will think it is time to do something of the kind but I think that we must wait a few years yet, and in the mean time it seems to me that it is well to have a monument at Cooperstown. I agree with you that there is a good deal of danger that the project of a statue of Leatherstocking will not be executed in the right manner.4 The troublous spirit you speak of, is, I suppose, one of the devils called blue. Tum him out. If he wont go, leave him at Boston and come and see the flowers open with me on Long Island-Do.-Kindest regards to Charlotte. Truly and kindly yours w. c. BRYANT P.S. ·what Dr. Dewey told you of my wife is exact. She is slowly re- covering-and is more like what she was six or seven years since than when I took her to Europe W.C.B. MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR ADDRESS: R. H. Dana Esqre DOCKETED: Bryant PUBLISHED (in part): Life, II, 124. I. Unrecovered. 2. See 783.3, 6. 3. Probably John Austin Stevens (1795-1874), president of the Bank of Com- merce, and an officer of the New York Chamber of Commerce. For Rufus Griswold, see 390.1; Letter 768. The Impending Crisis 107 4. The monument at Cooperstown, New York, erected in 1857 by a committee of which Washington Irving was the chairman, consists of a marble shaft topped by the figure of Cooper's most memorable character, frontiersman Natty Bumpo, or "Leather- stocking." It is located in Lakewood Cemetery. Rufus Rockwell Wilson and Otilie Erickson Wilson, New York in Literature ... (Elmira, New York: Primavera Press, 1947), p. 328. The project for a memorial to Cooper in New York City was never consummated. 1089. To Robert C. Waterston New York April 18, 1859. Dear Mr. Waterston. By the Express of Adams & Company, I have this day sent you a copy of my Letters from Spain and other countries, recently published 1 which I pray you to accept as some sort of memorial of the pleasant days we passed together in Europe. I have ventured to add Mrs. Waterston's name to yours in the manuscript inscription on the flyleaf. Your friend Mr. J. G. Clarke has been to our home several times, but I happened always to be out of town. My wife saw him once. I called since at his hotel but he is out of town in his turn. I suppose he wants letters for Spain, and I may be able to give him one or two.2 Mrs. Bryant is gradually improving in health and strength. Julia has had a severe attack of influenza, and my eldest daughter is now confined with a still severer one. The season is opening pleasantly, and I wish I could have you and Mrs. Waterston here to show you the first verdure and early flowers at our place on Long Island beside the little lakelets and the salt sea. Remember me most kindly_ and affectionately to Mrs. Waterston. If I were at home instead of writing this at the office of the Evening Post, I should have a whole budget of love from my family for you both. I am, dear sir, very truly yours w. C. BRYANT. MANUSCRIPT: PML 1. Letters of a Traveller. Second Series Half title, Letters from Spain and Other Countries (New York: D. Appleton, 1859). This comprised twenty-five letters written to the EP between June II, 1857, and August 9, 1858. 2. This was probably Jonas Gilman Clark (1815-1900), a merchant who founded Clark University at Worcester, Massachusetts, in 1887. 1090. To Christiana Gibson New York, April 19, 1859 ... To-day Mr. Fairchild took my wife, Julia, and myself to see the new park, in which thousands of men are at work blasting rocks, making roads, excavating, rearing embankments, planting trees-a sight that reminded 108 LETIERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT me of Virgil's description of Dido and her people building Carthage. The park is to be enlarged so as to take in all the precipices and intervening hollows as far as the plain of Harlem. The new reservoir is to be a great lake with curved, winding shores, and on the highest point of the grounds an Astronomical Observatory is to be erected.1 Mr. Cobden has been a good deal in the city since you left us. I have seen him twice, and found him very agreeable.2 On Thursday morning I am to meet him again at Mr. Bancroft's. When asked about Mr. Cobden's conversational powers, Mr. Bancroft said they were "unequalled, un- equalled." Mr. Cobden dined last week at Mr. Leupp's, and talked much of PeeP and other English statesmen. I hear, however, that he complains of being "dined to death." 4 ... MANUSCRIPT: Unrecovered PUBLISHED (in part): Life, II, 125. 1. Frances Bryant's brother Egbert N. Fairchild (134.2) was an engineer engaged in the construction of the reservoir in New York's Central Park, on which work had commenced in 1857. The park's superintendent was Frederick Law Olmsted, who in June 1859 married his brother John's widow, Frances Bryant's godchild, the former Mary Cleveland Bryant Perkins. See 406.4; Virgil, Aeneid, 1.420-440; Laura Wood Roper, FLO: A Biography of Frederick Law Olmsted (Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University Press [1973]), p. 142. 2. Bryant had first met Richard Cobden (545.2) at London in 1845. Now, as the British parliamentary leader visited Washington and New York early in 1859, he and Bryant renewed their acquaintance. The following year Cobden informed the American editor of his confidential negotiations for a commercial treaty with France. Cobden to Bryant, January 12, 1860, Life, II [131]-132; John Bigelow to Bryant, January 18, 1860, NYPL-BG. 3. Sir Robert Peel (544.3), earlier British prime minister. 4. For Cobden's account of these social engagements see The American Diaries of Richard Cobden, ed. Elizabeth Hoon Cawley (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1952), pp. 143-148, 171. 1091. To Orville Dewey New York, May 6, 1859 ... I wish you could take a look at our little place in the country this beau- tiful weather. The sunshine is pure gold, and there are floods of it, poured over a wilderness of blossoms, like cream over strawberries. I have been planting and transplanting, and removing fences, and putting in stone sluiceways for water instead of plank ones; but whether the place looks better for what I have done is more than I can tell. But I have a gardener who was brought up, he boasts, under Loudon and Lindley; 1 and, if what he produces bears any proportion to what he has made me pay for garden- seeds and garden-tools, I shall have flowers enough to overwhelm Mrs. Dewey with bouquets, and all manner of choice vegetables for your dinner, and all manner of garden-fruits for your dessert, if I should be able to draw you two to Roslyn to pass with us The Impending Crisis 109 "One long summer day of indolence and mirth." 2 I do not know how it may be with you, but for my part I feel an antip- athy to hard work growing upon me. This morning I have been labori- ously employed on the "Evening Post," and do not like it. Did you never feel a sense of satiety-a feeling like that of an uncomfortably over-loaded stomach, a rising of the gorge-at the prospect of too much to do? Does the love of ease take possession of us as we approach the period when we must bid the world good-night-just as we are predisposed to rest when the eve- ning comes on? ... MANUSCRIPT: Unrecovered TEXT: Life, II, 125-126. 1. The English horticulturalists John Claudius Loudon (1788-1843) and John Lindley (1799-1865), whose writings were widely influential in this country in the nine- teenth century. 2. This quotation has not been identified. 1092. To John Brown Patonl [New York, May 6, 1859]2 My dear sir, I was glad to hear from you a few days since3 though I confess some words in your letter were in a chirography that still puzzles me. Last eve- ning I heard an anecdote of Dr. Chalmers-4 He used to write his father, who on receiving one of his letters, used to say- "Aha letter from Tom; well, put it by he shall read it to us when he comes.["] Our friends address for which you inquire is "Edward Buck No. 11 Court Street Boston." I have not seen him since we parted in Switzerland,5 but he writes to my daughter occasionally and I hear that he preserves his good humor and that his wife is all the better for her travels.- The other brunt of your letter relates to what I may write. I shall have no objection to the arrangement you suggest if it can be brought about. I have a kind of engagement to send what I write in the way of verse to a periodical here, and if its proprieter consents 6 .... Of prose I write nothing except for my journal-a political and commercial paper. My wife and daughter thank you for your kind recollection of them. Our companion who was Miss Ives and is now Mrs. Mackie is in town and Julia has taken your letter to show her. ... MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR (draft) ADDREss: To Mr. John Brown Paton f Sheffield Eng- land. 1. Rev. John Brown Paton (1830-1911, B.A. London 1849, M.A. 1854) was a Congregational minister in Sheffield, England. Who Was Who, 1897-1916 (London: Adam and Charles Black, 1920), pp. 549-550. The Bryants met him during their travels through Switzerland in the summer of 1857. Bryant, "Diary, 1857-1858," July 28, 1857. 2. The date is supplied from the source named in Note 6 below. 110 LETTERS oF WILLIAM CuLLEN BRYANT 3. Paton, who edited the Eclectic Review, had asked Bryant to contribute poetry to his periodical. Paton to Bryant, n.d., 1859, NYPL--GR. 4. Probably Thomas Chalmers (1780-1847, D.D. Glasgow 1816), professor of di- vinity at Edinburgh University, 1828-1843, and a founder of the Free Church of Scot- land. See 547.4. 5. In 1857 the Bryants had traveled for several days in Switzerland in 1857 with a Dr. and Mrs. Edward Buck of Boston, not further identified. Bryant, "Diary, 1857-1858," July 23-August 3, passim. 6. Sentence incomplete in this draft letter. However, in an excerpt from the final manuscript, offered for sale in 1983 in a catalogue, Literary Letters, Manuscripts, b Documents, by the Rendells Inc., of Newton, Massachusetts, it seems to have been com- pleted by the words "I will see whether there is no objection to my sending it to England to appear at the same time." 1093. To Hector Orrt New York May 16th, 1859 Sir. I thank you for the honor you have done my lines entitled "October." You have associated them with others which are really beautiful and which I never had the pleasure of seeing before.2 I am, sir, respectfully yours W. C. BRYANT. MANUSCRIPT: UVa ADDREss: Hector Orr Esqre. 1 No. 310 Chestnut Street 1 Philadelphia. 1. A Philadelphia printer from 1837 to 1859, Hector Orr was listed thereafter in the city directory as a wood engraver. 2. See Poems (1876), p. 142. No publication of this sonnet by Orr has been located. 1094. To John Bigelow New York May 24. 1859. My dear Mr. Bigelow. You inquire whether I make any objection to your remaining abroad another winter. I supposed when you went away that one winter would hardly satisfy you; indeed I do not see how it should. Short of two years would not give you time enough to see half what you went out to look at, unless in a miserably hurried way. I would therefore have you take your own time. Our journal is more prosperous than ever; the circulation of all three editions is growing; the advertisers are pressing and utterly remorse- less; the profits as you will have seen are beyond what they ever were before. We have abundance of aid in the different departments of the paper, at present, and the public seem well satisfied with the manner in which they are edited. So you see, there is no pressing necessity for your return. When the Evening Post begins to decline, hold yourself in reserve to hurry back and prop it up. The Impending Crisis lll The Enlargement of our sheet is not likely to lose us money as you seem to imagine. On the contrary, we should have lost money if we had not enlarged the paper. People began to complain bitterly of the encroachment of the advertisements upon the space allotted to news. Intelligence, the news of the day, abridged to the baldest summary had to be left out day after day, and I was convinced that unless we gave more reading matter the circulation would suffer. The shape of the sheet is not improved by the change; but we had a choice of evils before us. If we merely lengthened the columns we should not have had room enough; if we widened and lengthened the sheet at the same time we should have had too much. If we made our journal a quarto the expense of altering the turtles would have been three thousand dollars. Besides, Mr. Henderson was very con- fident that by giving our journal the form of the Tribune and Times, we should lose the advertisements of the importers and wholesale dealers.1 You speak of a letter of yours which has not appeared in the Evening Post. All your letters intended for the paper have been duly published. The direction to send the Evening Post to the Paris Constitutional I re- member, and thought it had been attended to. As to Foreign Correspondence, you have probably seen that we have had here Signora Jessie White Mario. She came here with her husband, who is a Venetian, and a Republican, and an exile of course. She is well- informed, lively, and an enthusiast and has lectured in our principal cities on the subject of Italy to large audiences. She has just sailed for Europe, with a design to return to Italy and before she went I made an arrangement with her to write weekly letters for the Evening Post when there was any thing to write about, for ten dollars a letter. This was before I got your letter respecting Mr. Strutt.2 Madame Mario, I should mention was for- merly a correspondent of the London Daily News. What shall we do? Mr. Strutt's letters will certainly be wanted until Signora Mario begins to write, which may be some time yet. Besides she will write from Northern Italy, and he from Southern. May it not be de- sirable to retain both[?] They will probably write either about somewhat different matters or at least about matters seen from different points of view. I congratulate you on being back at Paris, though May is almost heaven in Italy. You are beyond the reach of inconvenience from the war3 -or rather Mrs. Bigelow is-as for you, you would be able to shift for your- self. My best regards to Mrs. Bigelow. My wife and daughter send theirs to you both. They are both pretty well-Mrs. Bryant has been gradually though slowly improving in health. Yours truly &c W. C. BRYANT. MANUSCRIPTS: NYPL-GR (final and draft) DOCKETED: W. C. Bryant f May 24, 1859. 112 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT I. On April 4 the four-page folio sheet of the EP was widened from nine columns to ten. The smaller Tribune and Times carried five and six columns, respectively. 2. The "remarkable English woman" Jessie White Mario was on one occasion "stolen" from the EP by the Tribune, but resumed writing thereafter for the EP until her death. Nevins, Evening Post, pp. 342, 559. Bigelow's letter is unrecovered; Strutt was probably Edward Strutt, first Baron Belper (1801-1880, M.A. Cambridge 1826), an authority on legal reform and free trade. 3. The war of 1859 between Austria and Sardinia. 1095. To Anna Q. Waterston New York May 24. 1859. My dear Mrs. Waterston. We all-my wife, Julia and !-thank you a thousand times for the memorial you have sent us of your daughter, 1 loved so tenderly and lost so early. It seems to us an admirable likeness, preserving the dignity the sweetness and the spirituality of her expression, if not in the fullest degree, yet in as great a measure as we could hope in any such shadow of the beauti- ful original. It will serve to remind us not merely of her, but of the pleasant days we all passed together before she was removed from a world of which she was the ornament. If you and Mr. Waterston go away from home this summer, it would give us infinite pleasure to welcome you to our place at Roslyn. If you can do us that favor, choose your own time, only let us know in season, that we may not by any chance be absent. My best regards to Mr. Waterston. My wife and daughter unite in love to you both. I am, dear Madam, truly and faithfully yours W. C. BRYANT P.S. The English papers perceive that Dr. Lardner is dead.2 When I first came to Naples, he was at the same hotel in which I took rooms-the Hotel des Isles Britanniques. He was then and some time afterwards in florid health. When I left Naples, he and his wife were quite low with a nervous fever caught on the Chiaja where they then lived. Julia says she heard some time since that they were still ill-and now comes the news of his death. I have little doubt of the fact that his death was owing to the climate. W.C.B. MANUSCRIPTs: UVa (final); NYPL-GR (draft) PUBLISHED (in part): Life, II, 126. I. This memorial, apparently a photograph, has not been recovered. 2. Rev. Dionysius Lardner (420.10). See Bryant, "Diary, 1857-1858" January 19, February 9, April 3, 1858. The Impending Crisis 113 1096. To Israel K. Tefft 1 Roslyn May 26, 1859. Dear Mr. Tefft. Finding myself at Roslyn and having an hour of leisure, I employ my- self in copying the poem mentioned in your note,2 and destined to have the honor of a place in your rich and vast collection of autographs. I am glad you were pleased with Miss Gibson. She on her part cannot say too much of the kindnesses she received from you and Mrs. Tefft. We are all well, and all at our country place in this holiday of the year. Kind regards to Mrs. Tefft. My wife and daughters desire a place in the friendly remembrance of you both. I am, dear sir, your much obliged W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: PML ADDREss: I. K. Tefft Esqre. I. A Savannah autograph collector; see 454.1. 2. The poem is unidentified; Tefft's note is unrecovered. 1097. To [the President of Brown University?] Office of the Evening Post, New York. June 15 1859. Dear Sir: The proprietors of the New York Evening Post take this means of of- fering to send, if agreeable to you, regularly, and with no charge for sub- scription, a copy of their Semi-Weekly or Weekly Journal to the Institution of which you are the President. Before doing this, however, they would require to be assured that the proffered gratuity would be acceptable, and that their journal would be preserved in some place where the students could have free opportunity to peruse it. They would also like, in case their offer be accepted, to know the address to which the paper should be directed.1 Respectfully Yours, WM. C. BRYANT Co. ~See Circular on Opposite Page MANUSCRIPT: Brown University Library. I. This printed letter was apparently sent to a number of college and university presidents. It was accompanied by a prospectus of the EP-the "Circular on Opposite Page"-for its "Fifty-Eighth Year." 114 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT 1098. To Orville Dewey [Roslyn? cJune 24 1859] Dear Doctor. I do not know why I did not answer your letter1 immediately-the day I got it-which is always the best way in such cases. I read it to my wife and we agreed that I should say that we would come as you suggest to pass the 4th of July with you, and now when I look again at your letter I find that you desired to know what time we would come so that you might arrange for others-and my business was to have answered you on the instant. So we go in this world sinning and regretting-swinging backwards and for- wards between wrongdoing and penitence-The mischief is that the pen- itence makes no amends for the transgression. [unsigned] MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR (draft). I. Dewey had written Bryant on June 2 (NYPL-BG) renewing his subscription to the EP, "the best paper I think in America," and inviting the Bryants to visit Sheffield before the "Great Fourth." I 099. To Orville Dewey Roslyn June 25 1859. Dear Mr. Dewey, We are thinking-my wife and Julia an[d] I-a whole family of us-of coming to Sheffield on Friday by the first train from New York. If you are not prepared to receive us then we will go on to Barrington; if you are [we] think of inflicting ourselves upon you till Tuesday. So you may put your- selves in training and lay in a stock of patience to be practised after our ar- rival. Kind regards to all-My wife and daughter desire their love. Yours very truly W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR ADDRESs: Revd. 0. Dewey. llOO. To George Bancroft Roslyn June 26. 1859. Dear Mr. Bancroft. ] e suis au desespoir, 1 and my wife is tearing her hair. Of all the days of the year, the 4th of July is the one which my wife and Julia and I have promised to pass with our friends the Deweys in Sheffield, and we are to go up on Friday. You see therefore that we cannot accept your most obliging invitation.2 Compatitemi3 as they say in Italy, only I say it with more in- The Impending Crisis 115 tensity of meaning. My kind regards and my thanks-a thousand of them to Mrs. Bancroft whose invitation has a force with me that would make me break through any impossibilities but moral ones to make me comply with it. I am, dear sir, very truly yours W. C. BRYANT. P.S. I enclose a note from my wife to Mrs. Bancroft which I beg you to hand her. W.C.B. MANUSCRIPT: LC ADDREss: Hon Geo Bancroft. I. "I am in despair." 2. Bancroft had written on June [25] "entreating" the Bryants to accompany him and Mrs. Bancroft to their summer home at Newport, Rhode Island, on July 2, "by the new land and water route, which is a charming one." Bancroft to Bryant, NYPL-BG. 3. "Sympathize with mel" HOI. To Julia S. Bryant New York July 15, 1859. Dear Julia. Your mother is exceedingly anxious that you should be written to- though there is nothing to be said. We found Roslyn in good order to all outward appearance, and took a pleasant sail in getting to it. Since that we have been sweltered with the heat till last evening-we hope you have not enjoyed the same blessing. But among the servants there was civil war, and we thought at one time they would all leave us on account of a quarrel between Ann and Stasia on one side and Charley and his wife on the other. A truce has been established for the time-but perhaps your help in looking up a handmaid may be wanted when you come to town. Regards to Mr. & Mrs. Mackie and Mrs. Ives and all friends. 1 Yrs affectionately W.C.B. MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR. I. Julia was apparently then visiting at Great Barrington her late traveling com- panion Estelle Ives (1832-post 1899), who had been married on January 27, 1859, to John Milton Mackie (1813-1894, Brown 1834), author and retired professor of rhetoric at his alma mater, and more recently a dairy farmer. Biographical Review, Containing Life Sketches of Leading Citizens of Berkshire County, Massachusetts (Boston, 1899), XXXI, 379-380. 116 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT ll02. To Hector Orr New York July 15, 1859. Dear sir. Your letter1 reached the office of my paper while I was absent in Massachusetts for several days. Since my return I have inquired concerning the "Currency Associ- ation" of which you speak. The club or society bearing that name is com- posed of several intelligent men who take an interest in that subject. Among them are Messrs. George Opdyke and Wilson G. Hunt,2 both well- known men in our community. I am, sir, respectfully yours w. c. BRYANT. P.S. I see that I have not answered all your inquiries. I doubt whether the "Currency Association[") has any corresponding officer-at least I cannot hear of any. The object of the Association is to check the tendency of the expansion of the currency in this country, and to introduce safe and solid principles of banking. Mr. Opdyke, I have no doubt or Mr. Hunt would with pleasure give you minuter information than I possess respecting its proceedings W.C.B. MANUSCRIPT: UVa ADDREss: H. Orr Esqre. I. Unrecovered. 2. George Opdyke (1805-1880), a clothing merchant and currency reformer, be- came mayor of New York in 1863. For Hunt, see 944.1. ll03. To Julia S. Bryant Roslyn July 18, 1859 Dear Julia, You will find the key of the store room or dining room closet in Godwin's library table drawer. The sheets and pillow cases are partly in the middle drawer of your mother's bureau and partly in the middle drawer at the bottom of the wardrobe. The cook has left us suddenly but with free permission. If you should be passing the Bible House and have time perhaps it would be well to speak to Mrs. Myers about a cook-but do not put yourself to any incon- venience as I shall come into town in a day or two and will attend to it myself. Yours affectionate! y w. c. BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR. The Impending Crisis 117 ll04. To Calvin Durfee1 Roslyn, Long Island, July 19, 1859. My Dear Sir:- I regret that I can contribute so little from my own recollection in aid of your undertaking. I will endeavor, however, to answer your in- quiries. I entered Williams College in the autumn of the year 1810,-almost half a century since,-having prepared myself in such a manner that I was admitted into the Sophomore Class. At that time Dr. Fitch was President of the College, and instructor of the Senior Class.2 I have a vivid recollection of his personal appearance,- a square-built man, of a dark complexion, and black, arched eyebrows. To me his manner was kind and courteous, and I remember it with pleasure. He often preached to us on Sundays, but his style of sermonizing was not such as to compel our attention. We listened with more interest to Professor Chester Dewey,3 then in his early manhood, the teacher of the Junior Class, who was the most popular of those who were called the Faculty of the Col- lege. Two young men, recent graduates of the College, acted as tutors, superintended the recitations of the two lower classes, and made their peri- odical visits to the College rooms, to see that everything was in order. These four were at that time the only instructors in Williams College. Before my admission, it had been the practice for the members of the Sophomore Class, in the first term of their year, to seize upon the persons of some of the Freshmen, bring them before an assembly of the Sopho- mores, and compel them to go through a series of burlesque ceremonies, and receive certain mock injunctions with regard to their future behavior. This was called gamutizing the Freshmen. It was a brutal and rather riotous proceeding, which I can, at this time, hardly suppose that those who had the government of the College could have tolerated; yet the tradition ran, that, if it was not connived at, at least no pains were taken to suppress it. There were strong manifestations of a disposition to enforce the custom after I became a member of the Sophomore Class, but the Freshmen showed so resolute a determination to resist it, that the design was dropped; and this, if I am rightly informed, was the last of the practice. The College buildings consisted of two large, plain brick structures, called the East and the West College, and the College grounds consisted of an open green, between the two, and surrounding them both. From one College to the other you passed by a straight avenue of Lombardy poplars, which formed the sole embellishment of the grounds. There was a smaller building or two of wood, forming the only dependencies of the main edi- fices, and every two or three years the students made a bonfire of one of these. I remember being startled one night by the alarm of fire, and going 118 LETTERS oF WILLIAM CuLLEN BRYANT out, found one of these buildings in a blaze, and the students dancing and shouting round it. Concerning my fellow-students I have little of importance to com- municate. My stay in College was hardly long enough to form those close and life-long intimacies of which college life is generally the parent. Orton and Jenkins-! am not sure of their Christian names, and have not the catalogue of graduates at hand-were among our best scholars, and North- rop and C. F. Sedgwick among our best elocutionists. When either of these two spoke, every ear was open. I recollect, too, the eloquent Larned, and the amiable Morris.4 The library of the College was then small, but I recollect was pretty well supplied with the classics. The library of the two literary societies into which the students were divided was a little collection, scarcely, I think, exceeding a thousand in number. I availed myself of it, however, to read several books which I had not seen elsewhere. Where the number of teachers was so small, it could hardly be ex- pected that the course of studies should be very extensive or complete. The standard of scholarship in Williams College, at that time, was so far below what it now is, that I think many graduates of those days would be no more than prepared for admission as Freshmen now. There were some, however, who found too much exacted from their diligence, and left my class on that account. I heard that one or two of them had been afterwards admitted at Union College. There were others who were not satisfied with the degree of scholarship attained at Williams College, and desired to belong to some institution where the sphere of instruction was more extended. One of these was my room-mate, John Avery,5 of Conway, in Massachusetts, a most worthy man and a good scholar, who afterwards became a minister of the Episcopal Church, and settled in Maryland. At the end of his Sophomore year he obtained a dismission, and was matriculated at Yale College, New Haven. I also, perhaps somewhat influenced by his example, sought and obtained, near the end of my Sophomore year, an honorable dismission from Williams College, with the same intention.6 I passed some time after- wards in preparing myself for admission at Yale, but the pecuniary circum- stances of my father prevented me from carrying my design into effect. Such is the sum of my recollections of Williams College, so far as they can have any interest for one who is writing its history, which I am very glad to learn that you have undertaken, and which I hope you will find ample encouragement to complete and put to press. I am, sir, yours with great regard, WM. C. BRYANT. MANUSCRIPT: Unrecovered TEXT: Calvin Durfee, A History of Williams College (Boston, 1860), pp. 106-109 ADDREss: To Rev. Calvin Durfee. I. Historian of Williams College; see descriptive note. The Impending Crisis 119 2. Rev. Ebenezer Fitch (1756-1833) was the first president of Williams College, serving from 1793 to 1815. 3. See 95.3. 4. Azariah Giles Orton (1789-1865) was later a distinguished theologian; Charles Jenkins (1786-1831) became a Congregational minister; William Northrop (1795-1819); Charles Frederick Sedgwick, Jr. (1795-1882) practiced law in Connecticut; Sylvester Larned (1796-1820) went into the Congregational ministry; Philip Van Ness Morris (1795-1864) first was a prosperous merchant, then late in life took a medical degree. George Tremaine McDowell, "The Youth of Bryant: An Account of the Life and Poetry of William Cullen Bryant from 1794 to 1821" (Unpublished Ph.D. diss., Yale University, 1928), pp. 101-103; Catalogus Collegii Gulielmensis MDCCCLXXIV (Wil- liamstown, 1874), pp. 18-19. 5. See Letters 4, 5. 6. Although at Williams for only eight months in 1810-1811, Bryant was awarded an honorary Master of Arts degree by the college in 1819, was restored to his under- graduate class on its fiftieth anniversary in 1863, and the following year was elected to the Williams Phi Beta Kappa chapter. McDowell, "Youth," pp. 113-114, and passim. II 05. To George Bancroft New York July 27th 1859. My dear Bancroft. Your hospitality is like the rain of heaven falling on the just and the unjust. I am glad you forgave my refusal of your first invitation-an en- forced refusal-so easily- As you leave me a liberal margin I will come, if you please on Wed- nesday next-the 3d of August-to remain perhaps, till Monday following. 1 If my wife continues as well as she is at present, she and Julia will accom- pany me. I have both your notes-and keep them as a testimony to the heartiness of the hospitality which could lead you to take so much trouble. My kind regards to Mrs. Bancroft and believe me as ever Yours truly W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: NYHS DOCKETED: W. C. Bryant f July 27.f59. I. The invitation was to visit the Bancrofts at Newport, with or without Mrs. Bryant, this week, next week, or "any part" of the first weeks of August. Bancroft to Bryant, July 21, 1859, NYPL-BG. ll06. To Elizabeth D. Bancroft1 Roslyn July 31, 1859. My dear Mrs. Bancroft. My wife has your very kind note, and commissions me to answer it. It is our intention to leave New York by the eight o'clock train on Wednesday morning,-which will inflict us upon you in the afternoon of that day. 120 LETTERS OF WILUAM CULLEN BRYANT I send this to New York to be mailed there and write also by the Roslyn mail not knowing which letter may reach you soonest. My wife and daughter desire their love. I lay myself, al ' Espagnole,2 at your feet. W. C. BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: LC. l. Mrs. George Bancroft (d. 1886). 2. "In the Spanish manner." 1107. To Richard H. Dana Roslyn, Long Island, August 1st. 1859. Dear Dana. I have never written to you to say what I think of your son's book on Cuba1 though I have carried about two letters of yours2 - in my side pocket for weeks, as a memorandum of my duty in that respect. I like it exceedingly. Few books of travels in which any information is conveyed are so little dull. Just now there is a good deal of curiosity about Cuba and its inhabitants, and this book gratifies it in regard to many im- portant particulars, at the same time that it is a book which cannot fail to detain the reader who simply takes it up for entertainment. It is the lively talk of an intelligent traveller at a dinner table, listened to with profit and without fatigue. It seems to me that the author has just hit the true point between too much and too little description. Many travellers tire you to death with overdescribing. In this book a few touches give the pic- ture, but they are the characteristic essential touches of a master. He must have made a remarkably good use of his time to have picked up during his short visit so many things worth knowing. I hope your son will find in the visit he is making to Europe the restor- ative to perfect health he is in search of. He is one of the over-worked ones. We kill ourselves here, in various ways-some by dissipation-some by deny- ing themselves all amusement-some by too sedentary habits-some by too great activity. Remember me kindly to Charlotte. My wife and daughter desire their love to you both. Yours ever W. C. BRYANT. MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR ENDORSED: W!!! C. Bryant, 1 Aug. 1159. Ans. 1 Feb. 23160-. l. Richard Henry Dana, Jr., To Cuba and Back; A Vacation Voyage (Boston, 1859). 2. One of these was probably Dana's letter of May 10, 1859 (Life, II, 126); the other is unrecovered. The Impending Crisis 121 1108. To Elizabeth D. Bancroft New York August lith 1859. My dear Mrs. Bancroft. You were so kind as to ask a promise from me to let you know how we got home. We had a pleasant night after leaving your beautiful seat by the shore, and were at the wharf on the Hudson before seven the next morn- ing. My wife experienced no inconvenience from the voyage except that she slept a little less than usual. In the afternoon we had a delightful pas- sage in another steamer to Roslyn. My wife and daughter both desire me to say how pleasant are their recollections of your charming place and its hospitable inmates by whom also they wish to be most kindly remembered. My best regards to Mr. Bancroft and your son. I am, dear Madam, very truly yours W. C. BRYANT. P.S. The storm which fell upon Newport on Friday afternoon was quite as violent at Roslyn. Nobody ever saw so much rain fall in so short a time- so they say-and the thunder was terrible and incessant. W.C.B. MANUSCRIPT: LC. 1109. To James P. Walker1 Garrison's Landing N. Y.2 August 27th 1859. Sir. The past experience of the proprietors of the Evening Post has de- cided them not to employ a Boston Correspondent. We have already given this answer to several clever writers who have made the same application that you have done. I am, sir, very respectfully yours, W. C. BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: Princeton University Library ADDREss: Jas P. Walker Esqre. I. Unidentified. 2. The Bryants were then visiting William Henry Osborn (1820-1894), president of the Illinois Central Railroad, in his summer home at Garrison's Landing on the Hudson River. Osborn was a son-in-law of Jonathan Sturges (421.1). See Frances Bryant to Christiana Gibson, July 29?, 1859, NYPL-GR. 1110. To Messrs. Richard Griffin & Co. New York, September 6, 1859. Gentlemen. I return to you the manuscript which was enclosed in yours of last month, having corrected two inaccuracies. In New England young men are 122 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CuLLEN BRYANT not articled to attorneys-they pursue their legal studies in the office of some counsellor, and the professions of attorney and counsellor are not distinct as with you.1 I am, gentlemen, respectfully yours W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: British Library ADDREss: R. Griffin & Co. 1. The letter and accompanying manuscript referred to are unrecovered. They apparently concerned a biographical sketch of Bryant to be printed by these London publishers in The Comprehensive Dictionary of Biography ... (London and Glasgow, 1860). But the brief account of Bryant, on p. 11 of a "Directory of Contemporary Biography" which follows the main text in that work, simply states, "William Cullen Bryant was born at Cummington, Massachusetts, 3d Nov. 1797 [sic.]. At an early age he decided to make the law his profession. He has written a great deal of poetry, showing a considerable amount of talent. He has also been long connected with one of the lead- ing American newspapers." llll. To D. W. Lee New York Oct. 6, 1859. My dear sir. I have your note and will attend the funeral as pall-bearer.1 I am sir yours truly W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: Leupp Family Papers, Rutgers University Library ADDRESs: D. W. Lee Esqre. I. On the day this letter was written, Charles M. Leupp (421.1, 487.1), with whom Bryant had been intimately associated in managing the American Art-Union, and with whom he had traveled abroad four times, died at New York by his own hand, in his fifty-second year. In an EP obituary Bryant wrote that day of his friend, "He was one of those whom the maxims and habits of trade had never corrupted; a man of open and generous temper, who abhorred every form of deceit and every unfair advantage." D. W. Lee was evidently Leupp's brother-in-law. lll2. To John Howard Bryant Office of the Evening Post New York, October 8, 1859 Dear Brother We have received a letter from Justin H. Olds1 enclosing the three notes for which I wrote. In exchange I send you the present note of four thousand dollars. Please acknowledge its receipt. All well. In haste. Truly yours, W. C. BRYANT The Impending Crisis 123 MANUSCRIPT: Unrecovered TEXT: "Bryant and Illinois," 643 ADDRESS: Jn. H. Bryant Esq. 1. Bryant's brother-in-law (520.1). Olds's letter is unrecovered. lll3. To Messrs. Derby&: Jackson1 New York October 11th 1859. Gentlemen. I understand that Professor Adler has offered you his translation of Raynouards History of Proven\al Poetry, 2 and I called this morning to speak with you concerning its publication, but was not so fortunate as to find you in. The work, you know, is a standard book on the continent, and with scholars every where. It has been the source from which lecturers on the literature of different countries and periods have drawn the materials for their accounts of the poetry of the Troubadours. It is therefore a book of solid pretensions, likely always to be in a certain demand,-a book which those who are interested in such works as Sismondi's History of the Liter- ature of the South of Europe,3 Bouterweck's4 and Ticknor's5 works.6 - Its publication would be respectable and creditable to any publisher in our country. A very considerable class of persons-those whose tastes in reading resemble my own-of whom I suppose the number cannot be small-would like to have it in their libraries. Professor Adler is a scholar and a man of great industry. I cannot doubt of the exactness and fidelity with which he has executed his task. With this memorandum of what I desired to say to you I have only to commend the enterprise of Professor Adler to your friendly consideration. I am gentlemen very truly yours W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: Brown University Library ADDREss: To Messrs Derby & Jackson. 1. The firm of J. C. Derby and Edwin Jackson were New York book publishers from 1855 to 1861. Derby was the author of Fifty Years Among Authors, Books and Pub- lishers (New York, 1884). 2. George J. Adler (1821-1868), a German-born philologist, was professor of modern languages at New York University from 1846 to 1853. Among his publications was a translation of Claude Charles Fauriel's History of Provem;al Poetry ... (New York: Derby & Jackson, 1860). 3. J. C. L. Sismonde de Sismondi, De la litterature du midi de ['Europe (1813). Bryant reviewed Thomas Roscoe's English translation of this work in the United States Review and Literary Gazette, 2 (September 1827), 467-468. 4. Friedrich Bouterwek, Geschichte der Poesie und Beredsamkeit (1801-1819). 5. George Ticknor, History of Spanish Literature (1849). 6. Bryant failed to complete this sentence. 124 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT 1114. To Daniel Coit Gilman New York October 31, 1859. Dear sir. I enclose you five dollars-the Annual Assessment for the Oriental So- ciety, together with a stamp. May I ask the favor of a receipt. Yours respectfully W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: JHUL ADDREss: D. C. Gilman Esqre, f Treasurer &c. lll5. To Frances F. Bryant Office of the Evening Post New York, Nov. 11th. 1859. Dear Frances. I have found Mr. Gourlie in. He says Uohn G.] Chapman has been pulled about by all manner of calls and little affairs-but that he will try to bring him to see you today, going early from his office and looking him up. He thinks the American shawl as acceptable a present as you could make. They have nothing of the sort there, and Chapman might wear it over, and there would be no duty on it, and it would be the very thing to wear to Tivoli in the winter-that is the season for going there. If you could send it to 26 West 17th St. Mr. Gourlies house, he would see that Chapman had it.- Dr. Gray is in 20th Street, No 18 next door to Broadway on this side. I went there. Cannon1 will come out on Monday Evening for certain- Yours ever W.C.B. MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR. l. A furnace repairman; see Letter 1121. lll6. To Alfred Field New York November 15, 1859. My dear sir I send you a few books and pamphlets relating to American politics. The book of Hildreth1 I am not sure that you will find many facts in bear- ing upon the questions you ask, but there may be something in it of which use may be made. The Political History of New York2 is a work full I think of instruction though not well written- It will be seen that in New York there was once a property qualifica- tion for voters, and that it has been abolished. I am not aware that any The Impending Crisis 125 mischief has arisen from the change. Political men are not less virtuous than they formerly were, I think. I am not sure that there is more corrup- tion and I am almost sure there is less tyranny. In Massachusetts the prop- erty qualification has been changed for universal suffrage-nor am I cer- tain that any thing has been lost by it. Of acts of tyranny exercised by the majority over the minority-the law which once existed in Massachusetts, compelling all denominations, Baptists Methodists Epis. to contribute to the support of the regular Con- gregational churches was an example. The democrats got the power in Massachusetts and repealed it in part-and finally it was repealed alto- gether. Of a like nature was the law compelling every man to attend some place of religious worship under penalty of a fine. If he did not make his appearance once in three months, in a church or meeting house he was mulcted. This law has been done away. But there are examples of the tyranny of the minority. The owners of manufacturing establishments are a minority in the United States-ami- nority even in Massachusetts. Include all their work people they are still a minority in every one of the states. Yet they are wealthy active and power- ful-powerful through concert of action, and they have influenced even the politics of the federal government. Members of Congress and statesmen of every class have paid court to them-they have even influenced the conduct of those whose interests are not at all the same with theirs. They have tyrannized over the majority with a protective tariff. You ask whether any thing has been done to make the rights of the minority safe, against the legislation of those who represent the majority. Nothing that I hear of. If you mean by the minority the rich, they do not need it. Every body here expects to belong to that minority some day or other. If you mean those who have some substance they are a majority. There is one experiment, however, which is now making, that of an elective judiciary, in regard to which there are differences of opinion-and in re- gard to the election of judges of the criminal interests, the opinion of sensi- ble men seems to preponderate in favor of a return to the old practice of Executive appointment. It strikes me, however, that if the practice of elect- ing the judges prove mischievous the old system will be restored. In Ver- mont at one time the judges were elected; the practice was then changed and they were appointed by the Governor, and since I believe they have changed again to the elective system. In all these cases it is not easy [to] compare the past and present-we can always see what changes are made in laws and constitutions, but not always whether the change is for the better. There are no statistics of cor- ruption, of venality, of the hypocritical adoption of popular opinions. Men who are not easily satisfied see the inconveniences and evils of present regu- lations, but they have not the past regulations with their evils before their eyes-so that they can make an impartial comparison. 126 LETTERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT What you say of the habit of public men "going it blind," as the saying is, for party ends, and the withdrawing of men of lofty virtue and intellect from connexion with politics certainly does not apply to the present time in America. There are very great differences of opinion and they are freely indulged. We have almost as many shades of political opinion as of religion. We have conservatives who hold the constitution to be a wicked compact- we have abolitionists we have free sailers-we have Republicans agreeing only in their enmity to slavery-we have three or four distinct sects in the democratic party-we have Native Americans, and these are divided into North & South, and these again into those who would exclude from office only the foreign born and those who would also exclude Catholics. Party ties are loosely worn, and party fidelity at a discount. I think, moreover, that the proportion of those who take an interest in political questions is larger than formerly- There will always be some who are so absorbed in other matters as to pay no attention to politics-but there are few who give politics up in disgust.- You will be apt to infer therefore that I for my own part, am not dis- satisfied with the result of the political experiment we are making-thus far at least. I have reached that age when men begin to compare the present unfavorably with the past, and I cannot see for my part, that the American people in the more than a third of a century that I have been a journalist are going back in any important respect. Mr. Godwin tells me that the country is full of letters written from England of a tenor similar to yours. 3 I hope the answers will convey in- formation that will be of use- You do not say any thing of Mrs. Fields health. Pray give our best regards to her and your sister and their children-and remember us to ... [conclusion illegible] MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR (draft) ADDRESS: To Alfd. Field. I. Richard Hildreth, The History of the United States of America ... 1497-1789 (1849-1852); or Theory of Politics (New York, 1853). 2. Probably Jabez D. Hammond, The History of Political Parties in the State of New York (1842). 3. Field's letter is unrecovered. lll7. To Theodore Sedgwick liP New York November 18, 1859. My dear Mr. Sedgwick. I hear you have a saddle-horse in this city for sale. My daughter Julia wishes me to inquire of you if the animal be perfectly gentle, and of an easy gait, and such a horse as you would purchase for your own daughters. Do you remember that you once gave me the heads of a warranty of a The Impending Crisis 127 horse? I have the paper on file yet. Would the description it contains apply to the horse you have for sale? I am sorry to hear of your continued ill-health. By this time I hope you are on the mending hand ere this, and that this application will occasion you no annoyance or trouble. We miss you very much here, for though I did not see you very often, yet the knowledge that you were among us made New York seem to me more homelike than it does when you have with- drawn yourself from it.2 Vivite et valete,3 Your old friend W. C. BRYANT. MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-BG ADDREss: Theo. Sedgwick Esqre. I. See 209.8, 475.1. 2. Having been appointed United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York in 1858, Sedgwick had retired soon after to his family home at Stockbridge, Massachusetts, where he died the month following this letter. 3. "May you live and be well." IllS. To Lorenzo Nelson Roslyn Dec. l, 1859. Sir. Mr. Cline has shown me a letter which you wrote to him concerning an arrangement he desired to make with you in regard to your assistance in taking care of my place here. For the year beginning with April next, Mr. Cline is to have the principal charge of the place, and the responsi- bility for keeping it in order. With regard to your personal character I en- tertain no doubts from Mr. Cline's account of its respectability. What I desire to know particularly regards your industry and expertness. There are some questions, your own answer to which would be entirely satis- factory to me. I wish to know whether you are well acquainted with the care of horses, of which there will be three on the place, whether you have been accustomed to tend to their feeding-whether you can drive a pair in a vehicle of any sort with dexterity and fearlessness. I suppose, that you are acquainted with the culture of the usual four crops, that you know how to mow and cradle and the like. Is this so?- Do you understand the culture of flowers; are you acquainted with the management of a cold vinery, are you practised in the transplantation of trees and shrubs; can you graft and bud? Expertness in these branches would make your services the more valuable. Then as to your habits of activity and industry what I would like to have is the attestation of some of your conscientious neighbors known to Mr. Cline. Would you procure one or two of these and send on to me or him? 128 LEITERS OF WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT You will excuse this particularity- Since the compensation you re- quire is considerably beyond what is commonly given here, I wish to be sure that I am to get something near the worth of the money paid. That you are a postmaster and held a commission of the peace, certainly implies that you are a man in whom confidence is placed, but not that you are a good farmer. I wish to have a person on the place on whom I may confidently call for any proper service to be done on the place. Mr. Cline I have found a very valuable man in these respects.- ! have been in the habit of giving the farmer on my place a quart of milk a day, and such as he needed of the roots and greens, cabbages, lettuce and so forth as are raised on the place, including potatoes for the year. In regard to matters of this sort we should have no variance I am sure.- When your answer to this arrives I will give it an immediate consider- ation, and Mr. Cline will write to you without delay. -When the arrange- ment is once concluded I should like to have it regarded as fixed and cer- tain, since to be disappointed in your coming after the bargain is made would put me to very great inconvenience.1 I am sir respectfully yours [unsigned] MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-BG (draft) ADDREss: Lorenzo Nelson Esqre f Blandford Mass. I. Nelson's letter to George B. Cline is unrecovered. It is evident from Letter II67, however, that Bryant engaged his services. 1119. To L. M. Gardnerl New York December 12th 18.~9. Sir. I am sorry I have no manuscript from the hand of Washington Irving to send you.2 Although we were on excellent terms whenever we met, and although I was under some personal obligations to his kindness, it hap- pened somehow that there was never any thing like an interchange of let- ters between us. I am, sir, very respectfully yours WM. c. BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: Carl H. Pforzheimer Library ADDREss: L. M. Gardner Esqre. I. Unidentified. 2. Irving had died at Tarrytown, New York, on November 28, at the age of seventy- eight. The Impending Crisis 129 ll20. To John Bigelow New York December 14th 1859. Dear Mr. Bigelow, I am quite ashamed not to have written to you in so long a time, but if you knew how lazy I feel when there is a letter to be written I am sure you would forgive me. In one of your late letters you say that you do not think Bartlett the exactly proper man for a Washington correspondent.1 He is the best man we can find, so we must be content; besides he has improved lately, and writes letters that are read with a good deal of interest. Probably Mr. Seward stays2 in Europe till the first flurry occasioned by the Harper's Ferry affair is over, but I do not think his prospects for being the next candidate for the Presidency are brightening. This iteration of the misconstruction put on his phrase of "the irrepressible conflict between freedom and slavery["], has I think damaged him a good deai,3 and in this city there is one thing which has damaged him still more. I mean the project of Thurlow Weed to give charters for a set of city railways, for which those who receive them are to furnish a fund of from four to six hundred thou- sand dollars, to be expended for the Republican cause in the next Presi- dential election. This scheme was avowed by Mr. Weed to our candidate for Mayor Mr. Opdyke and others and shocked the honest old democrats of our party not a little. Besides the democrats of our party, there is a bitter enmity to this railway scheme cherished by many of the old whigs of our party. They are very indignant at Weed's meddling with the affair, and between Weed and Seward they make no distinction, assuming that if Seward becomes President, Weed will be "Viceroy over him." 4 Notwith- standing, I suppose it is settled that Seward is to be presented by the New York delegation to the Convention as their man. Frank Blair the younger talks of Wade of Ohio,5 and it will not surprise me if the names which have been long before the public are put aside for some one against which fewer objections can be made Our election for Mayor is over. We wished earnestly to unite theRe- publicans on Havemeyer,6 and should have done so, if he had not absolutely refused to stand when a number of Republicans waited on him to beg that he would consent to stand as a candidate. Just as the Republicans had made every arrangement to nominate Opdyke, he consented to accept the Tam- many nomination, and then it was too late to bring the Republicans over. They had become so much offended and disgusted with the misconduct of the Tammany supervisors in appointing Registrars, and the abuse show- ered upon the Republicans by the Tammany speakers, and by the shilly shallying of Havemeyer that they were like so many unbroke colts-there was no managing them. So we had to go into a tripartite battle and Wood 7 as we told them beforehand carried off what we were quarreling for. Have- 130 LETTERS oF WILLIAM CuLLEN BRYANT meyer has since written a letter to put the Republicans in the right. "He is too old for the office," said many persons to me when he was nominated. After I saw that letter I was forced to admit that this was true. Your letters are much read. I was particularly, and so were others in- terested with the one-a rather long one on the policy of Napoleon,8 but I could not subscribe to the censure you passed on England for not consent- ing to become a party to the Congress unless some assurance was given her that the liberties of Central Italy would be secured. By going into the Con- gress she would become answerable for its decisions and bound to sustain them, as she was in the arrangements made by her and the other Great Powers after the fall of Napoleon-arrangements the infamy of which has stuck to her ever since. I cannot wonder that she is shy of becoming a party to another Congress for the settlement of the affairs of Europe, and I thought that her reluctance did her honor. 9 I should have commented on your letter in this spirit if it had been written by any body but yourself. I hope you are satisfied with the income of the paper. It is acknowl- edged by many, most I believe to be the most entertaining of the dailies. Williams, the dullest looking of men is turning out a trump and is to be relied on for any quantity of matter that is wanted, and the quality is sometimes, to my surprize first rate. 10 I worked very hard in the paper until last May, but since that [time] 11 I have given myself rather an easy time. I am now coming into town again, and shall probably resume my old habits. The Union savers, who include a pretty large body of commercial men, begin to look on our paper with a less friendly eye than they did a year ago. The southern trade is good just now, and the western rather un- profitable. Appleton says there is not a dollar in any bodys pocket west of Buffalo. My wife is in the country yet-essentially improved, and just ready to come in. Julia is getting strong by riding on horseback. My kind regards to Mrs. Bigelow, who I doubt not enjoys the gayeties of Paris greatly. I am dear sir truly yours w. C. BRYANT. MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR PUBLISHED (in part): Life, II, 127-128. I. Possibly \'Villiam 0. Bartlett, after 1868 an assistant editor of the New York Sun under Charles A. Dana. Mott. American journalism, p. 376. 2. Bryant mistakenly wrote "Seward's stay." 3. On October 25, 1858 Senator Seward of New York declared at Rochester that there were two incompatible political systems in the United States, one resting on slave, the other on free labor, and that their increasingly close contact would produce an "irrepressible conflict." His speech, an attack on the Democratic Party, was widely misinterpreted as urging the suppression of slavery by the federal government. Six months later, urged by political friends to escape from a controversy which seemed likely to hurt his chances for the presidency, Seward sailed for Europe, to be gone until the end of 1859. Thus, he was abroad during John Brown's raid on Harper's Ferry in The Impending Crisis 131 October, for which he was charged with complicity by southern opponents. VanDeusen, Seward, pp. 193-194, 211, 213-214. 4. In 1859 Thurlow Weed (1797-1882), journalist, powerful political boss, and Seward supporter, "built up a war chest by soliciting contributions from New York City business men, and by shaking down Republican office holders in the state. He obtained the promise of large contributions to the campaign fund from the promoters of New York City street railways whose franchises he guided through the state legis- lature." Ibid., p. 215. "Weed had damaged the Senator fearfully," Allan Nevins con- cluded, "by helping engineer the corrupt passage of six street-railway bills which grid- ironed half a hundred New York streets without conditions as to compensation, tenure, or fares." Emergence of Lincoln, II, 235. 5. Francis Preston Blair (1821-1875, Princeton 1841), Free Soil congressman from Missouri, 1856-1858, was, from 1860 to 1862, a Republican congressman, and later a Union general in the Civil War. Senator Benjamin Franklin Wade (1800-1878), of Ohio, was an anti-slavery leader in Congress. 6. William Frederick Havemeyer (1804-1874, Columbia 1823), a wealthy merchant and banker, had been Democratic mayor of New York in 1845 and 1848. 7. Fernando Wood (1812-1881), a Tammany Hall leader, had been elected mayor of New York in 1854 and again in 1856, and once more in 1859. 8. Louis Napoleon Bonaparte (1808-1873), Emperor Napoleon III of France, 1852- 1870. 9. Bryant's judgment was sound. English support in 1859-1861 of Sardinian pre- mier Camillo Cavour's efforts to unify an independent Italy was an important factor in the establishment of the Kingdom of Italy under Victor Emmanuel II. George Macaulay Trevelyan, History of England (London: Longmans, Green, 1926), pp. 654-655. 10. This was evidently Walter Francis Williams, who sent the EP "admirable letters from the field" during the Civil War. Nevins, Evening Post, p. 318. See Letter 1162. 11. Word omitted. ll21. To Frances F. Bryant [New York) Wednesday evening December 14th 1859. Dear Frances I wrote to you yesterday morning and this morning-you probably got my first letter today and will get my second soon after this. I have had two letters from Julia.1 I called on Mr. Cannon today-he doubts whether the boiler of our furnace leaks-if it did it would make mud in the cellar. He says we need be under no concern about the safety of the boiler as long as it is half full-not the tank but the boiler. Since I wrote you I have been to McKibbin's in the Fourth Avenue, Mrs. Kirkland's man, and he has given me the number and street of several places where I can have furnished rooms and a private table. I called at one of them in the 4th Avenue, a block or two above Blancard's and just such a house. An Englishwoman who keeps the house, showed me precisely the same rooms as Blancard did, and after some calculation asked me pre- cisely the same price. She however, did not insist so much on my keeping them till May, intimated that she might take less, and would charge but half price without board or when we were absent. I shall go to look at the other ones tomorrow after the dentist has done with me. I think now I 132 LETTERS OF WILUAM CULLEN BRYANT shall come to Roslyn on Sunday morning, but I must come back to the dentists on Monday. I found a little note from Miss Sedgwick when I came in, and answered it.2 I send you a letter from Miss J. Dewey. Yours ever W.C.B. MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-GR. I. None of these four letters has been recovered. 2. Neither Miss Sedgwick's note nor Bryant's reply has been recovered. ll22. To F. S. Perkins1 New York December 22nd 1859. My dear sir. The house in Cummington in which I was born has been pulled down. That in which I passed my childhood and early youth and which was the family homestead for many years afterwards is still standing with much the same external appearance that it had when I lived there-the only alteration made I think is that my father's office-he was a physician-is taken away. The house and farm are now owned by a man named Tilson- ! think that is his name.2 The out buildings have been somewhat changed -new ones built and on new sites. I am, sir, very truly yours W.C.BRYANT MANUSCRIPT: NYPL-Berg ADDREss: F. S. Perkins Esqre. I. Perkins is unidentified. No letter of inquiry from him has been located. 2. The Bryant homestead had been sold in 1835 by Austin Bryant to Welcome Tillson (1800-1877), a Cummington farmer. In 1865 Cullen Bryant bought the prop- erty back from the purchaser. William W. Streeter and Daphne H. Morris, The Vital Records of Cummington, Massachusetts: 1762-1900 (Hartford, Connecticut, 1979), pp. xlv, 234; Helen H. Foster and William W. Streeter, Only One Cummington: A Book in Two Parts (Cummington, Massachusetts: Cummington Historical Commission, 1974), p. 354.