fair fields and blasted rock 
american land 
classification systems 
and landscape aesthetics 
John r. stilgoe 
What is good land? Seventeenth-century North American colonists 
disagreed about its character; land that husbandmen cherished as rich 
and warm, miners condemned as barren while pioneering agricultur­
ists scorned it. Agricultural evaluation dominated colonial thinking, 
and throughout the eighteenth century Americans frequently classi­
fied all land unfit for agriculture —especially treeless mountains —as 
bad. Their contempt endured for another hundred years, probably 
warping national aesthetics and divorcing American notions of land­
scape beauty from the standards dear to European romantics. "The 
poet and the painter will seek in vain for those objects which they have 
been accustomed to behold under the influence of fascination, and to 
depict with enthusiasm and rapture," wrote Timothy Dwight in 1804 
of upstate New York. "The phrase beautiful country, as used here, 
means appropriately and almost only lands suited to the purposes of 
husbandry, and has scarcely a remote reference to beauty of land­
scape."1 Within twenty years, however, American artists had em­
braced the farmers' equation of rich agricultural land with beautiful 
country; only a few investigated the mineralogical land classification 
system and its insignificant aesthetic. The wilderness portrayed in so 
many paintings and tales reflects the aesthetic of the agricultural land 
concerns that shaped American thinking until explorers entered the 
High Plains and Rocky Mountains and learned again the mineralogi­
cal classification system. Until the 1870's beautiful country defined 
agricultural land —or land fit for agriculture. 
0026-3079/81/2201 -0021 $01.50/0 21 
 The elaborate agricultural and mineralogical land classification 
systems comprise a significant part of what Peter Burke calls the "little 
tradition," the wealth of belief and practice transferred orally and by 
example from one generation to another.2 Occasionally, as G.E. 
Fussell notes in The Classical Tradition in West European Farming, 
husbandmen maintained Roman agricultural practices well into the 
sixteenth century, weaving into the ancient wisdom an increasingly in­
tricate local lore of soil types and plant indicators.3 It is clear too, 
from such studies as Paul Sebillot's Les Trauvaux publics et les mines 
dans les traditions et les superstitions, Otto Hue's Die Bergarbeiter, 
and, more recently, G. Schreiber's Der Bergbau in Geschichte and 
John Ulric Nefs The Conquest of the Material World, that early 
modern European prospectors and miners understood a different tra­
ditional but equally complex land classification system that contra­
dicted the one favored by most agriculturists.4 Much less is known 
about the North and South American variations of the Old World 
land classification systems. Archer Butler Hulbert's Soil: Its Influence 
on the History of the United States, though dated, is still valuable, but 
it has spawned few other studies. Only James T. Lemon's The Best 
Poor Man's Country: A Geographical Study of Early Southeastern 
Pennsylvania details the usefulness of European soil classification rules 
in North America.5 Here I wish only to briefly describe the European 
systems on the eve of colonization, sketch how they functioned in 
North America and suggest that they helped shape American scenery 
values. 
i 
In A Philosophical Discourse of the Earth, John Evelyn discusses 
the Old World agricultural land classification system imported into 
North America. His treatise of 1678 emphasizes the usefulness of fourelement
analysis and the power of astrological influence. In ordering 
soils according to fertility, he describes "black, fat, yet porous, light," 
surface soil as "the best, and sweetest, being enriched with all that the 
air, dews, showers, and celestial influences can contribute to it." 
While he accepts with reservation the Baconian doctrine that the best 
soil lies wherever rainbows touch the earth, he firmly believes that veg­
etation indicates soil fertility. Camomile marks "a mould disposed for 
corn," burnet grows in soil useful as pasture and mallows indicate soil 
favorable to root crops. By tasting the soil, a wise husbandman can 
discover the presence or absence of important salts, and by careful 
watching he can see "exhalations from minerals and the heat of the 
sun" as well as true colors. Evelyn insists too on smelling the soil: 
"Upon the first rain, good and natural mould will emit a most agree­
able scent; and in some places (as Alonso Barba, a considerable Span­
ish author testifies), approaching the most ravishing perfumes. But "if 
the ground be disposed to any mineral or other ill quality, sending 
22 
 forth arsenical, and very noxious steams," the wise husbandman ought 
to avoid it. His frequent references to the four elements, often couched 
in terms like "sweetness," and his faith in celestial influence reveal the 
power of medieval custom in the early modern era. To be "well read in 
the alphabet of the earth" required an understanding of traditional 
wisdom.6 
Seventeenth-century letters from North American colonists reveal 
the complexity of soil analysis. "The soil I judge to be lusty and fat in 
many places, light and hot, in some places sandy-bottomed and in 
some loamy, reasonably good for all sorts of grain without manuring, 
but exceeding good with manure, some for wheat, some for rye, etc. ," 
advised one Bay Colony settler in 1638.7 Dutch colonists delighted in 
soil that Englishmen dismissed as too cold and wet, noting that lowlying
meadows "could be dyked and cultivated," and Germans, 
Swedes and other immigrants learned that their national land classifi­
cation systems made sense of New World wilderness ground.8 Early 
colonists understood that every species of tree indicates one or more 
peculiarities of soil fertility or sterility; each colony quickly produced 
catalogs of trees to prove the fertility of its soils.9 As late as 1759, Israel 
Acrelius described the trees of New Sweden in old-country terms, ex­
plaining that while the white oak indicates good soil, the hickory and 
sassafrass mark the richest.10 
By the middle of the eighteenth century, however, Americans had 
combined the tree lore of several European nations into one distinc­
tively their own, and land surveyors often casually classified the terrain 
they measured according to well-understood categories like "good 
land" or "bad land," as is evident in a 1792 manuscript "Plan of 
Irasburgh" Vermont and in other surveyors' plats.11 James Smith's 
1799 account of his captivity by the Indians of the Northwest Territory 
exemplifies the new national land classification system based on vege­
tation cover. Smith descried four sorts of land during his wanderings. 
What he calls "first-rate land" he knew by oak, hickory, walnut, 
cherry, black ash, elm, beech and several other species. Second-rate 
land he recognized by the appearance of spicewood trees among the 
beech, and third-rate territory by the small size of all trees and the 
preponderance of species like spicewood. Here and there he crossed 
land he calls "worse than third-rate," expanses marked by "hurtle 
berry bushes" or prairie.12 Americans had forgotten Old World wis­
dom concerning polder, steppes, and heaths; they perceived all tree­
less land—even the Illinois country Smith encountered — as barren, 
even when it produced grasses and shrubs several feet high. They 
avoided the blueberry barrens of Maine and the pine barrens of New 
Jersey, North Carolina and Georgia, and searched for land marked by 
trees like the hickory, where they stopped and tested the soil as care­
fully as had their seventeenth-century forebears. 
Astute European visitors discerned American modifications of Old 
World classifications. "The honey locust, which signifies fertile soil, 
23 
 perfumed the crest of the mountain with its flowers," wrote a French­
man exploring Pennsylvania in 1791. "Hickories and stalwart oaks 
luxuriously extended their branches."13 Ferdinand Bayard caught a 
trace of the emerging synthesis of practicality and aesthetics, but most 
Europeans learned only the practical significance of trees. A husband­
man "may know the quality of the land by the trees, with which it is 
entirely covered," asserted an English musician traveling through the 
countryside in the first years of the United States. "The hickory and 
the walnut are an infallible sign of a rich, and every species of fir, of a 
barren, sandy, and unprofitable soil."14 Throughout the first half of 
the nineteenth century, Americans prized land covered with hickory 
and walnut trees, and gradually they equated such species with more 
than good soil. Such trees represented dignity, strength, and courage, 
characteristics that won for Andrew Jackson the nickname "Old Hick­
ory," and they epitomized national standards of arboreal beauty.15 
Always, however, they first indicated fertile land. 
Nineteenth-century agricultural periodicals retained early modern 
European concepts of land classification in the most up-to-date arti­
cles, supporting the suggestion made by Herbert Leventhal in In the 
Shadow of the Enlightenment: Occultism and Renaissance Science in 
Eighteenth-Century America that much orally-transmitted lore en­
dured as common knowledge long after intellectuals had discarded 
it.16 An 1836 Farmer's Cabinet editorial, "On the Nature of Soils," for 
example, echoes Evelyn's theories by asserting that sand, clay, gravel, 
chalk, loam, and marl have different "degrees of warmth, air, and 
moisture," and must be carefully identified. "The best loams, and 
natural earths are of a bright brown, or hazely color," the editorial 
notes before explaining the various scents and textures of soils.17 Such 
thinking biased Dwight and Thoreau as they explored the "sterility" of 
outer Cape Cod. "In such ground no forest tree can grow either with 
rapidity or vigor," Dwight remarked of the duneland. "On the driest 
and most barren of these grounds grows a plant which I have never 
before seen, known here by the name of beach grass."18 Fifty years 
later, Thoreau slogged through the "barren, heath-like plain," 
wondering at the poverty-grass "despised by many on account of its be­
ing associated with barrenness," inquiring, as had Dwight, about the 
color of the soil, and finding little of beauty anywhere.19 Both men 
classified the region according to established but obsolescent stand­
ards; farmers in western prairies had learned that grassland might be 
fertile beyond belief, that a lack of trees might indicate anything but 
barrenness. 
In an 1818 article entitled "On the Prairies and Barrens of the 
West," Caleb Atwater of Ohio explained to readers of The American 
Journal of Science that prairie denotes discrete patches of natural 
grassland covering no more than about three by seven miles and pro­
ducing six- or seven-feet-high grass mixed with "some weeds and 
plum-bushes." Barrens identifies vast, almost limitless low, moist 
24 
 areas covered with grass, although capable of producing a few oaks 
and hickories in spots marked by low water tables. "From their appel­
lation, 'barrens, ' the person unacquainted with them is not to suppose 
them thus called from their sterility, because most of them are quite 
the reverse," he asserts before explaining the necessity for ditching. 
But Atwater knew that such land did not appeal to newcomers: "No 
pleasant variety of hill and dale, no rapidly running brook delights the 
eye, and no sound of woodland music strikes the ear; but, in their 
stead, a dull uniformity of prospect 'spread out immense.' "20 Even in­
novators willing to abandon traditional agricultural land classifica­
tion advice found such land ugly or monotonous. Tradition-minded 
Americans and most newly-arrived immigrants scorned such regions 
as sterile, and searched for "good land," the tree-covered ground they 
identified with fertility and beauty, the land prospectors and miners 
dismissed immediately. 
ii 
When the conquistadores discovered gold and silver in Mexico and 
Peru, esoteric sixteenth-century debates concerning quicksilver and 
mineral gestation, mountains and brimstone, alchemy and infernal 
heat suddenly involved not only alchemists and theologians, but also 
merchants, royal counselors, explorers and colonists.21 Western Euro­
peans looked to the Alps for expert advice about prospecting tech­
niques and slowly learned a land classification system antithetical to 
the comfortable one of husbandry. 
Richard Eden translated part of Vannuccio Biringuccio's Pyrotechnia
into English in 1555, only fifteen years after the work ap­
peared in Italian. Biringuccio's mineral-finding advice depends on 
four-element analysis and painstaking observation, but focuses on 
land husbandmen called barren. Metals are likely to exist in any 
mountain, he counsels, "by reason of the great barrenness and rough­
ness thereof," but only wise men understand how to locate the veins. 
They know that spring water tastes metallic near ore deposits, that 
mountains "rough, sharp, and savage, without earth or trees" make 
likely prospecting sites and that wherever mountain herbs or grass 
grow faint in color "and in manner withered and dried," ores lurk just 
beneath the surface. Gold "is engendered in divers kinds of stones in 
great and rough mountains, and such as are utterly bare of earth, 
trees, grass, or herbs," and announces its presence by the most subtle 
clues.22 Biringuccio and his translator cared little for theory; they in­
terested themselves in deciphering the surface signs of subterranean 
wealth. 
Seventeenth-century explorers needed works based on New World 
experience, not Alpine tradition. In response Alvaro Alonso Barba 
published The Art of Metals (1637) while supervising the exceedingly 
25 
 profitable mines at Potosoi in Bolivia, and the book soon appeared in 
English, German, and French. Barba explains how to follow streams 
and scrutinize eroded rock, how to use the cateador or prospector's 
pick, and how to identify the lines of plants half-sickened by metallic 
exhalations from ore veins beneath their roots.23 
Literate Englishmen slowly acquired such Spanish knowledge 
through works like Gabriel Plattes' 1639 masterpiece, A Discovery of 
Subterraneall Treasure. After asserting that gold and silver lie almost 
everywhere in the "burning zone" along the equator, he emphasizes 
that mountains are the best prospecting sites: "When we come to the 
rocky and craggy mountains, the first thing we are to observe, is the 
barrenness of them, for the more barren they are, the greater proba­
bility there is that they contain rich mines and minerals." He suggests 
distilling nearby spring water and noting the residue (a greenish one, 
for example, indicates copper deposits), and advises his reader "to go 
to the bare rocks, there to find out the clefts, crooks, and crannies . . . 
till you find some grass growing right upon the top of said crannies, 
and then observe diligently the kind of that grass, and how it differs 
from other grass ordinarily growing in the same mountain." Plattes 
took much of his information from New World hearsay, but some of 
it, he insists, derived from experimentation. "About midsummer, in a 
calm morning," he writes of a successful attempt to discover a vein of 
lead, "I cut up a rod of hazel, all of the same spring's growth, about a 
yard long," and wandered about likely sites until the wand bent down. 
Such divining confused agriculturists who expected that fertility- in­
dicating trees would indicate precious metals; but hazel twigs sought 
out silver, ash twigs responded to copper deposits, and not even hick­
ory branches twitched over gold. "Now in the new plantations, as New 
England, Virginia, Bermudas," he concludes at the end of his book, 
"where it is likely that few or none have ever tried, that had any skill in 
these affairs, it is very probable that the orifice of divers mines may be 
discerned with the eye in the clefts of the rocks . . . and yield more 
gain in one year than their tobacco and such trifles would yield in their 
whole lives."24 More than any other seventeenth-century textbook, A 
Discovery of Subterraneall Treasure illustrates the mineralogical land 
classification system some Englishmen carried to the New World and 
applied in frenzied attempts to recreate Spain's wonderful finds. 
Repeated failures convinced English prospectors that no gold or 
silver lay beneath the forested hills of Connecticut and Virginia, but 
the Spanish-derived fascination with otherwise barren ground still 
fired imaginations. In New Jersey, asserts Jedidiah Morse in his 1789 
American Geography, "the barrens produce little else but shrub oaks 
and white and yellow pines," but in Mexico, mines of gold and silver 
"are always found in the most barren mountainous parts of the coun­
try, nature making amends in one respect for defects in another."25 In 
schoolbooks, reprinted guidebooks —a Philadelphia printer reissued 
Plattes' Discovery as late as 1784 —and in oral tradition, the mineral26

 ogical classification system survived, predisposing Americans for the 
1849 rush to California's savage mountains. 
Prejudice deprived the mineralogical land classification system of 
a fair chance in the colonies, however, and made suspect its educated 
adherents. Husbandmen afraid of earthquakes, chemical poisoning, 
and a swarm of mountain furies distrusted anyone searching out those 
places likely to host calamity. Anthanasius Kircher explored the infer­
nal entrails of mother earth in Mundus Subterraneus, a massive, 
profusely-illustrated folio that appeared at Amsterdam in 1664. Kir­
cher understood alchemy, subterranean fire, dwarfs, planetary affini­
ties of metals and cave-dwelling dragons; his book appealed only to 
the very learned, but it analyzes many popularly-held beliefs, and of­
fers first-hand accounts of such terrifying episodes as the swallowing of 
Euphemia in Calabria during a 1638 earthquake, an event Kircher 
witnessed.26 Folk Christianity had long portrayed such incidents as 
divine retribution, and had long depicted mountain reptiles as mon­
strous relatives of the primeval serpent.27 
Mistrust of caves, earthquakes, and lizards arrived in North Amer­
ica with the first colonists, and German, Austrian, and Cornish miners 
recruited to work the few English diggings embroidered the tapestry of 
tales defining the subterranean world as the Devil's domain.28 Earth­
quakes scented the air with brimstone, and convinced thoughtful colo­
nists that somewhere beneath the sunlit earth, somewhere far below 
the graveyard sod, burned a great demonic fire, the fire that repeat­
edly rocked seventeenth-century New England.29 The 1727 earth­
quake that shook Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Maine con­
firmed American fears dating to the 1692 destruction of Port Royal in 
Jamaica, and the celebrated "moodus noises" forever rumbling be­
neath East Haddam, Connecticut kept alive the belief in underground 
conflagration.30 Earthquakes terrified colonists and caused learned 
men to pore over Kircher's tome; as late as 1833, one geology text 
cited his remarks concerning Euphemia. They prompted clergymen to 
preach about punishment and mineral-seeking. "God laid them low," 
said Samuel Willard of metals in a 1726 sermon directed against 
"greedy desire" and idolatry, "but man adores them, sets them up in 
his heart, and worships these, advancing them as high as God, and set­
ting them in His throne."31 Such sermons emphasize the honesty of 
agricultural labor and the blessing of fertile soil by condemning the 
infernal urge to delve into the earth after-tainted riches, to chance 
cave-ins, encounters with supernatural humanoids and serpents and 
poisoning, all for the sake of quick wealth. Until well into the eight­
eenth century, barren land connoted blasted land. 
Nineteenth-century periodical writers occasionally described sub­
terranean places, particularly mines like one explored by John Grammer
in 1818. "The gloomy blackness, however, of most of the 
galleries, and the strange dress and appearance of the black miners, 
would furnish sufficient data to the conception of a poet, for a descrip27

 tion of Pluto's kingdom," Grammer remarks before beginning a nononsense
account. "A strong sulphurous acid ran down the walls of 
many of the galleries; and I observed one of the drains was filled with a 
yellowish gelatinous substance, which I ascertained, on a subsequent 
examination, was a yellow, or rather a reddish, oxide of iron, mechan­
ically suspended in water." In the Virginia coal mines Grammer 
discovered the chthonic phenomena and perils described centuries 
earlier by Plattes and Kircher. Not only was coal in a contiguous seam 
on fire, but also "a strong sulphurous fume" shot steadily "from an ir­
regular hole in the side of the hill of about two feet in diameter," en­
crusting the nearby soil with crystals of pure sulphur. Explosions of 
some sort of "damp," probably "carburetted hydrogen gas," had killed 
several miners a short while before, and Grammer quit the diggings 
with relief.32 A few writers intrigued by non-agricultural spaces and 
activities visited other mines and prospecting sites before publishing 
similar articles filled with crypto-chemical jargon and tinged with 
traditional horror.33 But disastrous earthquakes like those that 
destroyed several settlements in the Missouri Territory in 1807 rein­
forced the dominant belief that beneath the earth's surface lies only 
terror, and that the more barren the place, the more likely an erup­
tion or other catastrophe.34 Most Americans condemned eroded, 
rocky land as bad; they deemed it unfit for agriculture and useless for 
artistic study. 
As Cecilia Tichi has recently shown in New World, New Earth: 
Environmental Reform in American Literature from the Puritans 
through Whitman, descriptions of wilderness interested chiefly upperclass,
well-educated readers able to learn about such places while en­
joying urban comforts.35 Almost always, however, the nineteenthcentury
wilderness descriptions emphasize wild land with some poten­
tial for agriculture, a potential usually announced by forest cover. 
"There is, perhaps, no part of our mountain regions where so great a 
variety of trees is presented to the student of landscape art as in the 
vicinity of the Catskills," remarked one essayist in The Crayon in 
1857.36 European-educated painters and critics now and then sug­
gested that rocky places devoid of vegetation deserve scrutiny too, but 
the educated public preferred the settings beloved by farmers. Viewers 
coerced artists, especially those employed as periodical illustrators, 
into repeatedly depicting rural scenes edged by hickory-, walnut- and 
oak-covered wilderness ripe for the axe and the plow.37 Barren land 
proved too suspect for art. 
Geological theorizing sharpened traditional dislike of barren 
mountains. Robert Chambers and other scientists scrutinized rock for­
mations and mountain-top fossils, and raised disconcerting questions 
about the age of the earth and Biblical accuracy.38 Long essays like 
Benjamin Silliman's 1833 "The Consistency of Geology with Sacred 
History" failed to convince educated Americans that mountains did 
not objectify serious religious uncertainty. Agriculture remained safe 
28 
 and noble, transmitted from father to son; geology and mining grew 
increasingly suspect, and shrouded in technical terminology.39 Barren 
mountains and atypical rock formations are conspicuously absent 
from much early-nineteenth-century painting, and from much writing 
too, even from Thoreau's sketches like "A Walk to Wachusett," which 
concerns his hike to the mountain and the view from its summit, but 
not the mountain top itself: "The summit consists of a few acres, 
destitute of trees, covered with bare rocks, interspersed with blueberry 
bushes, raspberries, gooseberries, strawberries, moss, and a fine wiry 
grass. The common yellow lily, and dwarf-cornel, grow abundantly in 
the crevices of the rocks."40 No transcendental spunk shapes his at­
titude toward the mountain; his essay almost piously remarks on the 
mountain as God's handiwork, and studiously avoids geological theo­
rizing. In a subsequent essay, Thoreau remarks that "Ktaadn pre­
sented a different aspect from any mountain I have seen, there being a 
greater proportion of naked rock rising abruptly from the forest," and 
calls the summit-edges of that mountain "the most treacherous and 
porous country I ever travelled."41 Above the timber line Thoreau 
entered a region that mocked his Concord-woodlot, vernacular knowl­
edge and aesthetic and tested his supposed opposition to traditional 
theology. Along with most other Americans, he preferred fields and 
forests. 
iii 
Did the agricultural and mineralogical land-classification systems 
help mould American painting and literature? An examination of 
some paintings and literary works suggests that they did. Nineteenthcentury
American scenery paintings and prose descriptions, as Bar­
bara Novak notes in American Painting of the Nineteenth Century 
and Nature and Culture: American Landscape and Painting, 
1825-1875, generally emphasize either the rural landscape of farms, 
pastures, and arable fields analyzed by Leo Marx in The Machine in 
the Garden or the enticing, wonderfully fertile wilderness examined by 
Henry Nash Smith in Virgin Land.*2 Very often, as in Thomas Cole's 
"Genesee Scenery" (1847), forest abuts farmland.43 Except in the work 
of a few painters like John F. Kensett and Martin Johnson Heade, the 
depicted wilderness, in my opinion, is typically wilderness with an 
agricultural potential.44 
Cole and other painters occasionally depicted bad land. "Expul­
sion from the Garden of Eden" (ca. 1827-1828) illustrates Cole's 
understanding of the mineralogical land classification system. On the 
right of the canvas is Eden, a fertile spot shaded by trees resembling 
those North American species thought to indicate warm, rich soil; op­
posite Eden stand jagged, rock-strewn mountains dotted by scraggly 
vegetation.45 The mountains derive mostly from Cole's imagination, 
not from his favorite painting location, the tree-covered, fertile Cats29

 kills, and they appealed to adherents of the traditional agricultural 
land classification system and to the educated elite suspicious of 
modern geology.46 Rail as he might against injudicious "newspaper 
praise," Cole found it impossible to escape his patrons' love of farm­
land and fertile wilderness, and he repeatedly painted scenes that sold, 
scenes like "Genesee Scenery."47 Kensett and Heade managed to com­
bine their atypical love of bare rocks with a flair for painting 
seacoasts, but even their most popular works treat agricultural land.48 
American writers depicted similar settings. Only a handful, often 
those with some understanding of European gothicism, devoted atten­
tion to the land scorned by agriculturists.49 
Hawthorne, Poe and especially Melville charged their writing by 
emphasizing land distrusted by their readers. Hawthorne focuses the 
action of "Ethan Brand" on a mountain-side lime kiln that "resembled 
nothing so much as the private entrance to the infernal regions, which 
the shepherds of the Delectable Mountains were accustomed to show 
to pilgrims," and sites "The Ambitious Guest" at a mountain house 
eventually destroyed by a rock slide.50 Poe heightens the subterranean 
horror of "The Cask of Amontillado" by choosing a crypto-chemical 
vocabulary that repulsed readers familiar with old terms like the 
"sweetness" or "sourness" of soil; the nitre-encrusted vaults derive from 
the geological vocabulary that marks "The Narrative of A. Gordon 
Pym," "The Gold Bug," and other tales set in barren places.51 
But Melville best understood the significance of barren land, and 
particularly barren mountains; his 1854 "Encantadas, or the En­
chanted Isles" juxtaposes the traditional land-classification systems 
and fuels nineteenth-century fears of geological science. "It is to be 
doubted whether any spot of earth can, in desolateness, furnish a par­
allel to this group," he writes of the archipelago "cracked by an ever­
lasting drought beneath a torrid sky." He mixes a Poesque chemical 
terminology with traditional mineralogical land classification system 
information, describing "tangled thickets of wiry bushes, without fruit 
and without a name, springing up among deep fissures of calcined 
rock, and treacherously masking them; or a parched growth of dis­
torted cactus trees." But his emphasis is essentially traditional, calcu­
lated to summon all his readers' antipathy to barren land. "Little but 
reptile life is here found: —tortoises, lizards, immense spiders, snakes, 
and that strangest anomaly of outlandish nature, the aguano. No 
noise, no low, no howl is heard; the chief sound of life here is a hiss." 
No wonder that he concludes his first chapter by noting that "I can 
hardly resist the feeling that in my time I have indeed slept upon evilly 
enchanted ground." He had slept on land as barren as any described 
in folklore, on land covered with crevices, stunted plants, and rocks, 
on land prone to earthquake and populated by small-scale dragons as 
ugly as any found by Kircher two centuries before.52 Melville's "Encan­
tadas" epitomizes the awesome evocative power of the mineralogical 
land classification system in a culture wedded to agricultural thinking. 
30 
 "The weapons with which we have gained our most important vic­
tories, which should be handed down as heirlooms from father to son," 
Thoreau remarked in 1862, "are not the sword and the lance, but the 
bushwhack, the turf-cutter, the spade, and the bog-hoe, rusted with 
the blood of many a meadow, and begrimed with the dust of many a 
hard-fought field."53 No one mentioned the cateador or praised the 
mining of mountains; Whitman and others heard the song of the 
broad-axe and rejoiced in fair fields and forests marking fertile soil.54 
No aesthetic tradition aided Americans gazing at the High Plains 
and the Rocky Mountains; beyond the tall grass prairie broken by 
stands of hickories and other beautiful trees lay the land beyond the 
grasp of agricultural land classification systems and the compass of 
eastern spatial aesthetics.55 "In the mind of an American, frequent 
forests, and frequent as well as fine groves, are almost necessarily 
associated with all his ideas of fertility, warmth, agricultural prosper­
ity and beauty of landscape," concluded Timothy Dwight in 1821. 
"Nor can he easily believe that a country destitute of trees is not 
destitute of fertility."56 Not until painters, journalists and photogra­
phers grew intimate with plains and treeless mountains did barrens 
and blasted rock receive the tender rendering accorded agricultural 
landscapes and fertile forest wilderness. And even after the conversion 
of artists, many Americans continued to regard rocky or treeless land 
as slightly treacherous and very ugly.57 Much work remains in the 
deciphering of American land classification techniques and their rela­
tion to the scenery values of the "typical" citizen and of the educated 
elite. Here I have only traced what appear to me to have been two 
significant land classification techniques that bear indirectly on 
American painting and letters. 
Harvard University 
notes 
1. Timothy Dwight, Travels in New England and New York [1822], ed. Barbara Miller 
Solomon (Cambridge, Mass., 1969), IV, 20. 
2. Burke, Popular Culture in Early Modern Europe (London, 1978), esp. 23-64; see also 
Carl von Sydow, Selected Papers on Folklore (Copenhagen, 1948), 11-19, 44-53 and Robert 
Mandrou, "Cultures Populaire et Savante: Rapports et Contacts," Popular Culture in 
France, ed. Jacques Beauroy (Saratoga, Calif., 1977), 17-38 for additional analysis of the 
European "little tradition"; see Henry Glassie, Pattern in the Material Folk Culture of the 
Eastern United States (Philadelphia, 1968), 1-17 for an interpretation of that tradition in 
America. 
3. (Rutherford, New Jersey, 1972), 82-137; on soils and location of farms, see W.G. 
Hoskins, The Making of the English Landscape (1955; rpt. Harmondsworth, 1970), 17-44 
and Alan Mayhew, Rural Settlement and Farming in Germany (New York, 1973), 118-167. 
4. (Paris, 1894), esp. 387-589; (Stuttgart, 1913); (Berlin, 1962); (Chicago, 1964); on Latin 
American mining, see John Robert Fisher, Minas y mineros en el Peru colonial, 1776-1824 
(Lima, 1977). 
5. (New Haven, 1930); (New York, 1976); for additional information on the application 
of German soil classification rules in Pennsylvania, see Stevenson Whitcomb Fletcher, Penn­
sylvania Agriculture and Country Life, 1640-1840 (Harrisburg, 1955), 48-55. 
6. (London, 1678), 289, 292, 298. 
7. Edmund Browne, "Letter" [September 7, 1638], Letters from New England: The 
Massachusetts Bay Colony, 1629-1638, ed. Everett Emerson (Amherst, Mass., 1976), 226-227. 
8. Adriaen Van der Donck, "Description of New Netherlands"[1656], trans. Jeremiah 
Johnson, New York State Historical Society, (1841), second series, I, 148. 
31 
 9. See, for example, Thomas Morton, The New English Carman [1637], ed. Charles Fran­
cis Adams (Boston, 1883), 182-187. 
10. Israel Acrelius, A History of New Sweden [1759], trans. William M. Reynolds 
(Philadelphia, 1876), 182-187. 
11. "Plan of Irasburgh," Bailey-Howe Library, University of Vermont, Burlington; for 
examples of surveyors' land classification vocabulary, see Hildegard Binder Johnson, Order 
Upon the Land: The U.S. Rectangular Land Survey and the Upper Mississippi Country 
(New York, 1976), 78-80. 
12. James Smith, Remarkable Occurrences [1799], ed. William M. Darlington (Cincin­
nati, 1870), esp. 84-90. 
13. Ferdinand Bayard, Voyage dan Vinterieur des Etats-Unis dans la Vallée de Shenan­
doah . . .1791 (Paris, 1797), 65 (my translation). 
14. William Priest, Travels in the United States (London, 1802), 35. 
15. John William Ward, Andrew Jackson, Symbol for an Age (New York, 1955), 54-57. 
16. (New York, 1976), esp. 1-10. 
17. I (October 1, 1836), 81-82. 
18. Dwight, Travels, III, 60. 
19. Henry David Thoreau, Cape Cod (1864; rpt. Boston, 1887), 122, 124, 80, 180-181; for 
an extended analysis of American evaluations of seashore topography and soil, see John R. 
Stilgoe, "A New England Coastal Wilderness," Geographical Review, 71 (January, 1981), 
33-50. 
20. I (1818), 116-125; see also Douglas R. McManis, The Initial Evaluation and Utiliza­
tion of the Illinois Prairies, 1815-1840 (Chicago, 1964). 
21. For an introduction to the controversies before the discovery of New World precious 
metal, see Conrad von Megenberg, Buch derNatur (Augsberg, 1475). 
22. For the Pyrotechnia see Richard Eden, The Decades of the New World [1555], in The 
First Three English Books on America, ed. Edward Arber (Birmingham, England, 1885), 
esp. 355, 357, 363-364. 
23. Alvaro Alonzo Barba, El Arte de los Metales [1640], trans. Ross E. Douglass and E.P. 
Mathewson (New York, 1923). 
24. (London, 1639), 2, 4, 9-10, 12, 13, and passim; for other seventeenth-century attitudes 
toward mineral-rich land, see John Amos Comenius, Naturall Philosophie Reformed by 
Divine Light (London, 1651), esp. 93-146; Thomas Houghton, Rara Avis in Terris: or The 
Compleat Miner (London, 1681); John Woodward, An Essay toward a Natural History of the 
Earth (London, 1695), all of which derive in part from Georg Agricola, De re metallica 
[1556], trans. Herbert Clark Hoover and Lou Henry Hoover (New York, 1950). An excellent 
introduction to sixteenth- and seventeenth-century mining is Helmut Wilsdorf, Georg 
Agricola und seine Zeit (Berlin, 1956). 
25. (Elizabeth Town, 1789), 286-287, 480. 
26. (Amsterdam, 1664), II, 90-103,184-185,187, 227, 256, 293, 322, and passim. 
27. Johann Jacob Scheuchzer, Sive Itinera per Helvetiae alpinas regiones (Leyden, 1723), 
II, 353-401; "The Two Brothers/' German Folk Tales [1857], ed. Jacob and Wilhem Grimm, 
trans. Francis P. Magoun and Alexander H. Krappe (Carbondale, Illinois, 1960), 226-243. 
28. George Gershon Korson, Black Rock: Mining Folklore of the Pennsylvania Dutch 
(Baltimore, 1960). 
29. John R. Stilgoe, "Folklore and Graveyard Design," Landscape, 22 (Summer, 1978), 
22-28; Cotton Mather, The Terror of the Lord: Some Account of the Earthquake that Shook 
New England (Boston, 1727). 
30. Cotton Mather, A Short Essay (Boston, 1727), esp. appendix 46-47; on the moodus 
noises, see Benjamin Trumbull, A Complete History of Connecticut (New Haven, 1818), II, 
91-93. 
31. The geology text is Robert Bakewell's An Introduction to Geology (New Haven, 
1833), 251; Samuel Willard, A Compleat Body of Divinity (Boston, 1726), 117. 
32. "Account of the Coal Mines," The American Journal of Science, I (1818), 125-130. 
33. "A Description of Bald Eagle Valley," Columbian Magazine II (September, 1788), 
488-492. On jargon, see Maurice P. Crosland, Historical Studies in the Language of 
Chemistry (1962; rpt. New York, 1978), 65-106. 
34. The early-nineteenth-century Missouri earthquakes made an extraordinary impres­
sion on the popular mind; see, for example, Timothy Flint, Recollections of the Last Ten 
Years [1826], ed. C. Hartley Gratten (New York, 1932), 212-220. 
35. (New Haven, 1979), 173-174; see also Roderick Nash, Wilderness and the American 
Mind (New Haven, 1967), 59-61. 
36. "Trees and Rocks at the Catskill Mountains," The Crayon, IV (September, 1857), 
281-282. 
37. "The Relation between Geology and Landscape Painting," The Crayon, VI (August, 
1859), 255-256. On periodicals, see, for example, "View from Bushongo Tavern," Colum­
bian Magazine, II (July, 1788), 354, and the Currier and Ives lithographs like "Among the 
Pines: A First Settlement." See also the forthcoming catalog of "New England's Prospect," 
Dublin Seminar for New England Folklife, Dublin, New Hampshire and the Currier 
Gallery of Art, Manchester; New Hampshire. The exhibit emphasizes folk and popular 
32 
 landscape sketches, maps, paintings, and other graphic forms. 
38. Robert Chambers, Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation (New York, 1845). 
39. Silliman appended his essay to Bakewell's Introduction to Geology, 389-466. 
40. [1843] (Boston, 1863), 85. 
41. "Ktaadn" [1848], The Maine Woods (Boston, 1884), 56, 61. 
42. (New York, 1969) and (New York, 1980); (New York, 1964); (Cambridge, Mass., 
1950). 
43. In the Museum of Art, Rhode Island School of Design. 
44. Novak, American Painting, 97-101, 125-137. I have compared Novak's conclusions 
against the works in the Karolik Collection, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. 
45. In the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. 
46. Novak, Nature and Culture, 31-56. 
47. Louis Legrand Noble, The Life and Works of Thomas Cole [1853], ed. Elliot S. Vesell 
(Cambridge, Mass., 1964), 160. 
48. Theodore E. Stebbins, Jr., Martin Johnson Heade (College Park, Maryland, 1969); 
see also, Richard B.K. McLanathan, Fitz Hugh Lane (Boston, 1956). 
49. On the spatial elements of gothicism, see, for example, Maurice Levy, "Edgar Poe et 
la tradition 'gothique/ " Caliban: Annales de la Faculté des Lettres de Toulouse, 4 (1968), 
35-51 and Patricia Meyer Spacks, The Insistence of Horror: Aspects of the Supernatural in 
Eighteenth-Century Poetry (Cambridge, Mass., 1962), esp. 67-102. 
50. Nathaniel Hawthorne, "Ethan Brand" and "The Ambitious Guest," Complete 
Works (Boston, 1882), III, 477-498 and I, 364-374; for the quotation see III, 478. 
51. BestKnown Works, ed. Hervey Allen (New York, 1927), 205-209, 431-554, 53-77. 
52. Salvator R. Tarnmoor [Herman Melville], "The Encantadas, or Enchanted Isles," 
Putnam's Monthly Magazine, III (March, April, May, 1854), 311-319, 345-355, 460-466; for 
the quotations see 311-313; for an excellent analysis of Melville's land-classification percep­
tion of the islands, see Donald Worster, Nature's Economy: The Roots of Ecology (Garden 
City,N.Y., 1979), 115-129. 
53. "Walking," Excursions, 192-193. 
54. Walt Whitman, "Song of the Broad Axe" [1856], Leaves of Grass and Selected Prose, 
ed. John Kouwenhoven (New York, 1950), 147-157. 
55. On problems in classifying the "barren" regions, see John Wesley Powell, Report on 
the Lands of the Arid Region of the United States, with a More Detailed Account of the 
Lands of Utah [1878], ed. Wallace Stegner (Cambridge, Mass., 1962); on aesthetic responses 
of early travelers, see Robert Taft, Artists and Illustrators of the Old West, 1850-1900 (New 
York, 1953) and Ronald Rees, "The Scenery Cult: Changing Landscape Tastes over Three 
Centuries," Landscape, 19 (May, 1975), 39-47. 
56. Dwight, Travels, II, 139. 
57. Yi-FuTuan, Landscapes of Fear (New York, 1979), 79-80, 109,127, 140, 207. 
33 
