15
SEALS AS CONCEPTUAL AND RITUAL TOOLS 
IN CHINESE BUDDHISM, CA. 600– 1000 CE
PAUL COPP
AS ELSEWHERE IN the premodern world, seals— and, even more importantly, 
conceptions of seals, and of the human behaviours that featured them— were central
to the practice of religion in premodern China. They are perhaps most famous 
in what are called the “Esoteric,” or Tantric, forms of Buddhism in China, which, as 
in India, feature hand gestures and bodily postures known as mudrās— literally 
“seal” in Sanskrit— a word that in Chinese is straightforwardly translated by the 
main word for seal (and stamp) in that language: yin 印. Beyond ritual postures, 
and again following Indic conventions, seals in the Esoteric traditions also provided 
central metaphors for a range of practices and ideas in the Esoteric traditions. The 
most startling of these is described by David Gray in a recent study of mudrā as 
a term of art in Indian Buddhist literature whereby, drawn in part from the heterosexual
male imagination of seal- like sexual union, mudrā “designates a female 
deity, and later, by extension, a human female.”1 Although in Chinese versions of 
the Esoteric traditions this particular conception was less emphasized, as we will 
see the intimacy of physical contact and, in particular, the physical transmission 
of likeness intrinsic to practices of sealing were adapted to a great variety of uses 
not only in Buddhism but in Daoism as well. Seals indeed— in part due to the infusion
of Indic conceptions and practices— possessed a nearly unmatched richness 
of polysemy in Chinese religious discourse and practice.2 But they did more than 
provide metaphors for practice: actual seals (and stamps) also had their places in 
the hand of Chinese religious specialists of a range of traditions and styles. Echoing 
both older Chinese and Indic techniques alike, seals in the period treated here (ca. 
600– 1000 CE, an age sometimes called “late medieval”) were key tools of ritualists, 
employed either as adjuncts to spells or as the delivery mechanisms of inscribed 
spells or talismanic texts and images. These metaphors and physical practices, and 
the interplay between them, are the subject of this brief survey.
The scholar attempting a cross- cultural study of conceptual and physical seals 
immediately encounters a difficulty: the rich semantic fields of the words mudrā, yin, 
I am grateful to Brigitte Bedos- Rezak, Carla Nappi, Carol Symes, and the two anonymous 
reviewers for the journal for insights that improved this study. The research in this article 
was supported by Project 16zD173絲綢之路中外藝術交流圖誌.
1 Gray, “Imprints,” 422. See also Gonda, “Mudrā.”
2 on its polysemy in Indian Buddhist literature, see Gray, “Imprints,” 469– 74.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 PAuL CoPP
16
and “seal” do not fully overlap, and one must be careful not to let the various senses 
of these terms get entangled. Let me thus begin with a brief word on important 
distinctions not only between yin and “seal” but also between Chinese and Western 
studies of seals (since my subject is China, I will not explore the uses of Indic terms 
or the traditions of their study in any detail). First, we can note simply that yin does 
not denote “a seal” in the sense defined by Merriam- Webster as “a tight and perfect 
closure.” This is true even though seals were used in China, as elsewhere, to seal things 
closed for various reasons. But, more importantly, this study is structured by a distinction
between seals proper and a much broader category of stamps. Seals, in this study, 
are stamps whose forms and practices were governed by logics of personal or institutional
identity; the priest’s seal, for example, bore his identity— and, by extension his 
power— and was thus a potent object in itself. Stamps, in contrast, were simple tools 
for the multiple reproduction of images or texts and bore no special significance in 
themselves. Whatever potency was said to inhere in them, on this view, was entirely 
due to the images or texts they bore.3 The distinction in Chinese practice is not always a 
sharp one: the two are ideal types lying at opposite ends of an analytical spectrum, with 
some objects and practices best understood as partaking of both types. Indeed, the 
distinction is not usually made at all in premodern Chinese linguistic usage. In Chinese 
texts from the period treated here, the same term, yin, is used for all kinds of stamps 
and stamping techniques, including block printing, though seals as I define them here 
did, at times, have their own technical vocabulary. Furthermore, most scholars of this 
material have not drawn a distinction between seals and stamps, tending to call all 
such object seals (an exception is T. H. Barrett, a scholar who, as we will see at several 
points, has blazed a trail through this material that I will often follow).4 Yet, despite 
these difficulties, I believe the distinction between seals and stamps is crucial to an 
understanding of the techniques and objects this article surveys.
Seals as Conceptual Tools
We start with seals as conceptual tools, for the importance of seals in Buddhist practice
and thought is clearest in the key metaphors they provided the religion as it 
was carried eastward out of India and transformed in various local cultures. Their 
3 In this study, I employ a range of terms for seals, stamps, and their impressions. “Seal,” 
“sigil,” “seal die,” and “seal matrix” refer to seals as imprinting objects; “sealing” refers generally
to the images or marks made by seals, while “impression” and “imprint” refer to those 
products made by either seals proper or stamps of other kinds; “sealing,” “bulla,” and— 
sometimes— “token” refer to physical objects (usually lumps or discs of clay or terracotta) 
made to carry the impressions of seals.
4 Barrett, “Images of Printing,” 84.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 17SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
17
pervasiveness in Buddhist thought, indeed, might be an illustration of the dictum 
of Henry David Thoreau: “All perception of truth is the detection of an analogy; we 
reason from our hands to our head.”5 Such analogies in the Buddhist case concern, 
among other things, the nature of the Buddha’s teachings and their mastery (“Seal of 
Truth,” “Seal of the Dharma,” “Seal of the Buddha”), states of meditative attainment in 
which these teachings are realized (“Samādhi of the ocean Seal”), and the relationship
between teacher and student (“Mind Seal” and “Seal of Approval”), as well as the 
postures taken by Buddhist deities and practitioners (Skt. mudrā, “seal”).
Probably the most important set of seal metaphors in Buddhist thought is the one 
constituted by images of seals of truth or reality, which often took the name of the 
Buddha or of his teachings, the Dharma. In such images we see a first vivid illustration
of the essential logic of seals: the extension of identity in play, as when a seal was 
understood to represent the person of the monarch stamped on his documents or 
carried by his officials. In extending the power of the throne to the object bearing it, the 
impression left by such royal sigils transformed what they marked with the authority 
and presence of the state. The official bearing the seal matrix also bore with him that 
authority, the aegis of which defined his own social identity. He was in this way both 
subsumed within the state’s protective aura and himself the granter and keeper of that 
protection. We see the same semiotic logic of identity extension in simpler practices, 
such as the use of seals as personal signatures or as merchants’ marks.6 We also see it 
in the metaphorical Seals of Truth, of the Dharma, and of the Buddha himself that are 
said, in a wide range of Buddhist texts, to be stamped on scriptures as well as on the 
phenomena of normal human experience, which are thereby marked as identical with 
the deepest truths and realities told of in the religion.
one of the earliest extant descriptions of such a seal occurs in Lokakṣema’s (zhi 
Loujiachen 支婁迦讖, second century CE) rendering of the Pratyutpanna Samādhi 
Sutra (Banzhou sanmei jing 般舟三昧經), The Meditation of Direct Encounter with 
the Buddhas of the Present. Here the Buddha is describing the true nature of a seal 
that is to be used to seal the text of the sutra that tells of it:
What is the Seal of the Buddha? It is, namely, that which cannot act, is 
without cravings, without desires, without conceptual thoughts, without 
attachments, without aspirations, without rebirth, without preferences, 
birthless, nonexistent, non- grasping, non- caring, unabiding, unobstructed, 
nonexistent, unbound, exhausted of what exists, exhausted of desires, not 
5 Thoreau, The Journal, 76.
6 Descriptions of the basic logics of religious seals in China include Strickmann, Chinese 
Magical Medicine, 142– 43; Barrett, “Images of Printing,” 84ff.; and Paper, The Spirits Are 
Drunk, 202– 7, 214– 15.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18 PAuL CoPP
18
produced from anywhere, imperishable, indestructible, ineradicable, the 
essence of the Way, and the root of the Way. As to this seal, the arhats and 
the pratyekabuddhas cannot destroy it, cannot ruin it, and cannot impair it. 
Fools then doubt this seal. This seal is the Seal of the Buddha.7
In China, perhaps the most vivid and important use of the idea of the Seal of 
the Buddha is found in descriptions of the state of meditative consciousness 
known as the “Samādhi of the ocean Seal” (haiyin sanmei 海印三昧; Skt. sāgara- 
mudrā- samādhi)— the state in which one realizes that all things are marked by 
the Seal of Reality. A helpful discussion is found in the Xiu Huayan aozhi wangjin 
huanyuan guan 修華嚴奧旨妄盡還源觀 (“Contemplation of How, Cultivating the 
Innermost Teachings of the Huayan, Delusions are Exhausted and one Returns to 
the Source”), a work attributed to the Buddhist exegete Fazang 法藏 (643– 712). 
Here the samādhi, or deep state of meditative consciousness, is described as the 
condition wherein all phenomena of the cosmos appear in the mind as if reflected 
on a great ocean that has, since the “winds” of delusion have been made to cease, 
become perfectly still and clear. In this state, one is said to see that, despite their 
seeming differentiation, all phenomena are in fact “sealed” by— that is, identical 
with— the ocean itself, here an image both of the mind and of reality as such.
During the seventh through the tenth centuries CE, arguably the most intensely 
formative period of Buddhism in China, Buddhists adopted and reworked seal 
metaphors and added new examples of their own. Seals from this period became 
central to pictures of the intimate communication of truths from one mind to 
another (like the perfect impression of a stamp) and of the person transformed 
by those truths (as if by wearing a seal of authority). Most famously, seals became 
guiding figures of practice in the Chan 禪 tradition— better known in the West by 
its Japanese name, zen— in which received metaphors, such as “mind seal” (Ch. 
xinyin 心印) and “seal of approval” (Ch. yinke 印可), framed the ideal spiritual 
careers of monks, especially in their relationships with their teachers and with the 
traditional past. The awakened mind of the teacher, it was said, was like a seal recreating
its image perfectly in the person of the disciple, a process— in which seal 
impression becomes in turn seal matrix— repeated from generation to generation, 
and constituting a key aspect of the tradition’s self- understanding.8
7 Banzhou sanmei jing, trans. Lokakṣema, T no. 418, 13: 919b. The translation is from 
Harrison, The Pratyutpanna Samādhi Sutra, 103. I have capitalized “seal” in “Seal of the 
Buddha,” to make it conform to usage elsewhere in this study.
8 See T. Griffith Foulk’s concise discussion of these metaphors in his definition of the term 
佛心印, “Seal of the Buddha- Mind,” in the Digital Dictionary of Buddhism (www.buddhism- 
dict.net), accessed September 23, 2011.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
19
The truths said to be embodied in the Chan teacher were also, naturally, found 
in the religion’s scriptures. Their words, too, were at times described as seals that 
could be impressed into the minds of students. The Jingde chuandeng lu 景德傳燈錄 
(“Jingde- Era Records of the Transmission of the Light”), a foundational text of the 
Chan tradition presented to the Song imperial throne in 1004, speaks in just these 
terms when it has the influential Chan teacher Mazu 馬祖 (709– 788) state that 
he “cites the words of the Laṅkāvatāra sūtra to seal the minds of living beings.”9 
Such seals of perfect understanding, it was said, could at times also be found naturally
occurring in priests of native genius, such as the monk Yongjia Xuanjue 
永嘉玄覺 (665– 713), whose biography in the late tenth- century collection Song 
gaoseng zhuan 宋高僧傳 (“Song Traditions of Eminent Monks”) states that, in him, 
the “mind- source retained its aboriginal purity; in him the complete text of the 
wisdom seal was present.”10
Notable, too, in this period were images of mastery drawn from particular 
native styles of the extremely widespread practice of wearing seals at the sash or 
belt. The famed literatus and minister of the Tang state (618– 907) Pei Xiu 裴休 
(791– 846), in his preface to the Chan monk Huangbo’s 黄檗 (d. 850?) Chuanxin 
fayao 傳心法要 (“Essentials of the Transmission of Mind”), praised Huangbo as 
being one “who alone wore at his sash the seal of the Highest Vehicle that is apart 
from words.”11 A Chinese account of the nature of the practice of a Buddhist monk 
at Nālanda, the great monastic university of medieval India, in a related image, 
said that the monk “held in his palm the secret key to meditation and wore at his 
sash the mystic seal of the Thus- Come one.”12 Drawing on another long- standing 
Chinese practice— using seals as tokens guaranteeing the authenticity of orders 
on the battlefield— zongmi 宗密 (780– 841), in his Chanyuan zhuquan ji duxu 
禪源諸詮集都序 (“Preface to the Collected Writings on the Sources of Chan”), 
related contemporary accounts of the “Sixth Patriarch” Huineng’s bestowal of the 
teachings on his students in this way: “All reported that, within, he bestowed the 
secret words; without, he transmitted the robe as a token. Teachings and robe, 
given together, in this way acted as tally and seal.”13
9 引楞伽經文以印衆生心地. Jingde chuandeng lu, 219c (see also 246a). Jinhua Jia argues 
that this statement dates to sayings collected during Mazu’s lifetime in the late eighth century:
Jia, The Hongzhou School of Chan Buddhism, 119– 20.
10 心源本淨智印全文. Song gaoseng zhuan 宋高僧傳, T no. 2061, 50: 758a.
11 獨佩最上乘離文字之印. Huangbo shan Duanji chanshi chuanxin fayao 黄檗山斷際禪師傳
心法要, T no. 2012A, 48: 379b.
12 掌定門之祕鑰佩如來之密印. Song gaoseng zhuan 宋高僧傳, T no. 2061, 50: 714c.
13 内授密語外傳信衣衣法相資以爲符印. Chanyuan zhuquan ji duxu 禪源諸詮集都序, T 
no. 2015, 48: 401b.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 20 PAuL CoPP
20
The omnipresence of such imagery in Buddhism is easy to understand. Seals 
had long been central to the practices of the civilizations, Indian and Chinese 
most prominently, in which Buddhism took on its most powerfully influential
cultural forms. Indeed, beyond Buddhist Asia, seals and stamps had been in 
wide use for millennia in cultures “upstream” (as it were) from the seal cultures 
of Buddhist India and China, including those of ancient Mesopotamia, Egypt, and 
the Mediterranean, all of which were marked at very early stages by many of the 
same techniques and concepts found in the much later behaviours of Chinese 
Buddhists. Seals— which the scholar of ancient Mesopotamia Elena Cassin has 
simply called “facts of civilization”14— were crucial elements in a range of early 
cultures: techniques for ensuring privacy in written communication; markers of 
good faith in political and trade relations; emblems of institutional, personal, and 
divine identities; and, from an early stage, tokens worn on the body or employed 
in rituals as talismans.15 Seals were worn suspended on cords as amulets and as 
social markers in civilizations as disparate as those of the ancient Near East, the 
Graeco- Roman world, and India.16 Surveying the broad connections illuminated by 
this material, Pierfrancesco Callieri has said that, “[in] the vast cultural domain in 
which the interaction of Hellenism with the civilizations of Western, Central, and 
Southern Asia is a constant feature, few categories of material offered me such 
rich possibilities for … research on the relations between East and West as seals 
and sealings.”17 The present brief study seeks, among other things, to demonstrate 
that, to the east of this landscape, we must also add China and the rest of East Asia.
Corresponding continuities in the use of seals as metaphors occur across an 
astonishingly vast landscape of culture and geography.18 As Brigitte Bedos- Rezak 
14 See Cassin, “Le sceau.”
15 Dominique Charpin (Reading and Writing in Babylon, 92) notes that the inscriptions on 
the earliest Babylonian seals were prayers. For a broad study of seals focusing on East Asian 
practices, see Niizeki, Tōzai yinshōshi. For a convenient overview of ancient and medieval seal 
practices from around the world, see Collon, ed., 7000 Years of Seals. For a vividly illustrated 
survey that focuses on later eras, see Rosaia, Ratti, and Capellini, Les sceaux.
16 See Parpola, “Seals of the Greater Indus Valley,” 49; Betts, “Minoan and Mycenaean 
Seals,” 66; Dikshit, “Cunningham Collection,” 129; Schlingloff, “Stamp Seal,” 70; Bedos- Rezak, 
When Ego Was Imago and “From Ego to Imago”; Platt, “Making an Impression” and “Burning 
Butterflies;” and Callieri, Seals and Sealings.
17 Callieri, Seals and Sealings, 11.
18 Note that, in a seminar paper from 1997, T. H. Barrett was already calling for the Buddhist 
evidence of sealing, stamping, and printing to be placed within as historically broad a context 
as possible (Barrett, “Images of Printing,” 92– 93, especially note 36). I hope this study— and 
the much larger one from which it is drawn— can be considered a response to this call and at 
least a small step in achieving this important goal.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 21SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
21
notes, “Mesopotamian and biblical texts, Platonic and Aristotelian treatises, 
patristic and early medieval commentaries, all incorporate sealing imagery as a 
conceptual tool.”19 Seals, from Britain to China, were prominent in images of the 
relationship between teacher and student and of the human apprehension and 
embodiment of truth. Sealing an impression into a person, in such images, is a 
figure of the reformation of the person in the image of the seal, in which the seal 
matrix stands for the prototype, the original, whether God, in Christian examples, 
or, in Buddhist cases, the Buddha (or a living master understood as buddha) and 
the truth he awakened to. Bedos- Rezak quotes the exhortation of the Cistercian 
abbot of Swineshead Abbey (Linconshire), Gilbert de Hoiland (d. 1172): “Imprint 
yourself to him [God] so that his image may be expressed in you, make yourself 
conform to his seal.”20 Crucial to the nature of such metaphors, whether in medieval
Britain or Tang China, is the intimate contact implied by it. Bedos- Rezak, 
describing medieval Christian cases, notes that they figured the relationship 
between sign and referent as being “one of origin, participation, and resemblance,” 
in terms that are highly suggestive of the Buddhist (or, as we will see, Daoist) case:
[The] imprint forever and doubly retains the marks of its derivation. As a 
trace, it represents the causality of its cause; as an image, it represents the 
cause with respect to its likeness. This may account for the extensive use of 
the term impressio to describe the filiation, kinship, and affinity, between 
God and creatures marked by His imprint. Impressio thus came to project 
the notion of image as personal, as a presence which linked cognition of 
the self and recognition of God within oneself. It was the inner nature of 
man, that fabric imprinted by God, which enabled him to comprehend 
his “being- image” … The imprint could not only articulate that filiation 
and achieve that formal resemblance (despite a difference in substance) 
between image and archetype which was necessary for man to be able to 
evolve a knowledge of God, but it could also imply that direct contact which 
rendered man’s soul God- like as it took on the sculptural form of the divine 
seal.21
We see much here that echoes Chinese Buddhist conceptual seals: the intimate contact 
and attained resemblance implied by the image of the “mind seal,” especially when it is 
19 Bedos- Rezak, When Ego Was Imago, 55.
20 Bedos- Rezak, “From Ego to Imago,” 160– 61.
21 Bedos- Rezak, “From Ego to Imago,” 171, 163– 64. For equally illuminating discussions of 
seal metaphors in the classical world, see Platt, “Making an Impression,” especially 250– 51, 
and “Burning Butterflies,” passim.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 22 PAuL CoPP
2
properly understood as an integral part of “mind- to- mind transmission” in the larger 
Chan context; and also the “filiation, kinship, and affinity” of that transmission, effected 
and marked by the seal, in which one takes a position within an imagined spiritual 
bloodline anchored in “ancestors” (zong 宗, zu 祖). But, deeper than this, as we have 
seen, conceptual seals in Buddhism were often key elements in images of the structure
of reality itself, in particular (and in part, no doubt, because the logic of sealing 
implies two entities: impressing matrix and impressed substance) of the relationship 
between the truly real and the merely apparently or understood- to- be real— that is, 
the “two truths” featured in Buddhist doctrine. In terms of seals, this relationship 
was perhaps most vivid in the figures of the “Seal of the Buddha” or the “ocean Seal,” 
described above, wherein the infinite welter of phenomenal experience is seen as 
impressed with— as identical to— true reality, whether that is understood in terms of 
the metaphors of “emptiness,” the “one mind,” or others.
This basic conceptual figure clearly had great power in Tang China beyond 
the confines of Buddhist thought. The Daoist Xuanzhu lu 玄珠錄 (“Record of the 
Mysterious Pearl”), compiled by Wang Daxiao 王大霄 (zi Taixiao 太霄, b. ca. 671) 
and said to contain the writings of Wang Hui王暉 (hao Xuanluan 玄覽, 626– 697), 
makes a now familiar claim: “Moving outwards: things everywhere; entering 
inwards: nothing at all; all being is sealed with the talisman of emptiness …”22 
Elsewhere in the work, Wang and a later commentator, whose remarks are set off 
here in parentheses, elaborate the trope in greater detail:
The ten thousand things are born endowed with the Way (Dao). However, 
though the ten thousand things change and differ from each other, the Way 
itself does not change or differ. Thus, its actions do not distort its tranquility. 
(Like the words carved on a seal.) Yet, since things are endowed with the 
Way, when things differ from each other, the Way differs in accordance with 
them. This is the Way responding to things. (Like words impressed on clay.) In 
stamping clay with a seal, the clay will bear any number of words but the original
words on the seal itself are not thereby diminished. (This illustrates that 
the actions of the Dao do not distort its own tranquility.) one may impress any 
amount of clay with a seal— in all of it the words will be the same as the original
words on the seal, yet those original words are not thereby diminished. 
(This illustrates that when things shift, the Dao for its part shifts.) Thus [the 
Laozi] says: “The more one gives, the more one has.”23
22 出則徧諸法入則一毫無持一空符以印諸有. Xuanzhu lu (Daozang ed.), 2.8b. See also 
Barrett, “Images of Printing,” 90n29.
23 Xuanzhu lu 1.1a– b. I consulted and sometimes quote Barrett’s translation (Barrett, 
“Images of Printing,” 90).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 23SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
23
For readers unused to Daoist rhetoric, this is perhaps an enigmatic passage. The 
Way (Dao)— that is, for Daoists, the truly real, whose nature can be studied and 
emulated— is likened to a cosmic seal, which, although it imprints its “words” on 
the infinite, and infinitely disparate, phenomena of the world, itself remains unitary
and singular. That is, although the Dao- imprinted phenomena and situations 
of the cosmos all endlessly “change” and “shift” (in the language of the text), the 
Dao itself does not; it simply “responds to things,” suffusing them in whatever 
form they take but remaining in itself unchanged and infinitely responsive. In the 
final words of the passage, via a quote from  chapter 81 of the Laozi (aka Daodejing 
道德經)— a work of immense importance for the much later Daoist religious 
tradition— this unchangeability and inexhaustible responsiveness is presented as 
a model the adept should emulate.
While their similarities are striking, however, the contrasts revealed in medieval
British and Tang Chinese seal- inspired imaginings are just as telling, and reflect 
the very different conceptions of the relationships between the human mind and 
the really real (or the divine) found in each culture. In Chinese Buddhist conceptual
seals, a single all- at- once impression, figuring, in the language of the tradition, 
“sudden” or “primordial” enlightenment, was key to the logic of the ideas they were 
used to illustrate. In contrast, imprinting in the Christian cases, for Bedos- Rezak, 
was “a repetitive process, [warranting] gradual human reformation because it 
permits a progressive resemblance to the divine model. By ‘imprinting himself to 
God’s seal’, man is conceived as participating in and pursuing God’s creation, while 
self- reformation through repeated imprinting is made possible by the presence of 
God’s seal within man.”24 Along with the images of the Mind and ocean Seals, or, 
indeed, of Wang Hui’s sealing by the Dao— all, again, governed by logics of a single 
all- at- once, at times even primordial stamping— we can take one final example of 
a Chinese account. Returning to the writings of the Tang Buddhist thinker Fazang, 
we see, as in his discussion of the imagery of the ocean Seal, emphasis on the all- 
at- once nature of the impressions made by seals (or here perhaps more simply 
stamps) in illustrations of the structures of truth and of the teachings attributed to 
the Buddha. As in all the conceptual seals we have surveyed, the point here is not 
simple description but the positing of a model for thinking and for an approach to 
the world:
All the doctrines of the Buddha were preached together on the fourteenth 
day [after his awakening], at once from beginning to end, from beginning to 
end at once. This is just as in this world, in the method of stamping, we read 
texts as having meaning that proceeds from beginning to end, but when 
24 Bedos- Rezak, “From Ego to Imago,” 160– 61.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 24 PAuL CoPP
24
they are stamped [that text] appears all at once. Yet, in this, the principles of 
“all at once” and “from beginning to end” do not contradict each other. You 
should know that the principles of this Middle Way [that is, of Buddhism] 
are also like this, and let it guide your thinking.25
Seals as Ritual Tools
Buddhist Ritual Seals in China
Turning now from philosophy to physical practices of ritual sealing, it is clear that the 
efficacies claimed for talismanic or otherwise spiritual seal practices also derived from 
the basic social logics of seals. For example, the spiritual protection said to be offered 
those dwelling behind a door sealed against demonic intrusion was an extension of 
the protection offered to the contents of envelopes or containers of trade goods by 
personal sigils. A seal’s social power is, after all, always in part “spiritual.” As Verity Platt 
notes in her study of Graeco- Roman seal stones, a “seal’s impression … establishes a 
set of moral obligations which bind those who encounter it: to break or forge a seal is 
an act which everyone knows is wrong.”26 The form of social magic most widespread 
in medieval Chinese religious seal practice was, again, that of identity. We find seal 
matrices inscribed with the names or images of gods and buddhas that made physically
present the powers and principalities to which they were dedicated, both in their 
material forms of cast bronze or carved wood and in the persons of those who used 
them, whether they were trained ritualists employing wooden seals that they themselves
had carved, or laypeople wearing sigils obtained as charms against the dangers 
of the road.27
In China, seals were key tools of social practice at every level, and the 
imagery of seals in the metaphors of the age, in both literature and social life, 
was correspondingly potent. In the Tang period (618– 907 CE), seal use was 
the site of new and widespread practices of personal engagement with the 
world, most famously as tools in the self- fashioning and self- presentation of the 
25 一切佛法並於第二七日一時前後説前後一時説如世間印法讀文則句義前後印之則同
時顯現同時前後理不相違當知此中道理亦爾準以思之. Huayan yisheng jiaoyi fenqi zhang, 
482c1– 5. The translation once again in part quotes that of Barrett (“Images of Printing,” 92), 
who notes that Fazang likely adapted the language of what was by then a classic Buddhist 
metaphor featuring the imagery of lost- wax moulds.
26 Platt, “Making an Impression,” 234.
27 The classic Western- language study of magical seals in medieval China is Strickmann, 
Chinese Magical Medicine, 123– 93. More recent studies better grounded in the archaeological 
record include Liu, Kaogu faxian yu zaoqi Daojiao yanjiu, 131– 74; Wang, Daojiao fayin lingpai 
tan’ao; Li, Daojiao fayin mizang; and zhou, ed., Ershi shiji chutu xiyin jicheng.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 25SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
25
literatus— signatures stamped on his letters and documents, and, as marks of 
his connoisseurship, on the paintings he owned or appreciated. In this way, to 
return to an example given earlier, the “seal” worn by the Chan teacher Huangbo 
at his belt marked him as a master in a way vividly and intimately recognizable 
by his and Pei Xiu’s fellow literati.
Buddhist seals and their techniques also underwent transformations in 
ritual practices of healing, exorcism, and spiritual liberation widespread in 
the culture. By at least the turn of the eighth century, stamp seals had become 
prominent tools in Chinese Buddhist ritual practice. Manuals from the period 
describe techniques that range from the stamping of healing or supernatural 
potencies into bodies, to those said to shatter hells beneath the earth, and to 
the related ceremony of “stamping sand-buddhas” (yinshafo 印 沙 佛 ) practised 
by local Buddhist communities at Dunhuang, wherein buddha images were 
stamped into stream banks at the turn of the New Year to aid in the renewal 
and purification of the cosmos.28 Although Buddhists in China had begun to use 
seals in rites of exorcism and various forms of spiritual enhancement at least 
300 years earlier, when the first scriptural evidence for their practices appears 
in the transmitted record, it was only in the early eighth century that stamps 
appear in iconography in the hands of bodhisattvas and as normal instruments 
of Buddhist practice in the accounts and ritual manuals of major Buddhist 
writers such as the Huayan exegete Li Tongxuan 李通玄 (ca. 635– 730).29 Before 
the eighth century seal techniques had mainly been practised and elaborated 
within relatively obscure rituals centring on dhāraṇī incantations, techniques 
that led to the production of native scriptures such as the Guanding jing 灌頂經 
(the Consecration Scripture), the Azhapoju guishen da jiangshang fo tuoluoni 
jing 阿吒婆拘鬼神大將上佛陀羅尼經 (the Scripture of the Dhāraṇīs of the Great 
Demon General Āṭavaka), and the Foshuo Changjuli dunü tuoluoni zhou jing 
佛説常瞿利毒女陀羅尼呪經 (the Scripture of the Dhāraṇī- Incantations of the 
Poison Woman Jāṅgulī).30
With the rise in cultural status of these practices in eighth- century China— 
and perhaps especially those prescribed in Buddhist incantation scriptures— 
seals began to appear much more prominently in the material and visual 
28 Major studies of yinshafo include Hou, “La cérémonie”; Tan, “Yinsha, tuofo, tuota”; and 
Wang and Wang, “Dunhuang wenxian yinshafo wen.”
29 For a study of the iconography of seal- bearing bodhisattvas in Chinese Buddhism that 
focuses especially on the later Song and late imperial periods, see Sørensen and Suchan, 
“Seal- Bearing Bodhisattvas.” on Li Tongxuan’s account of seals, see below.
30 Strickmann, Chinese Magical Medicine, 123– 93.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 26 PAuL CoPP
26
components of the religion. We see them in the forms of ornate and intricate 
bronze “thousand buddha” stamps commissioned by wealthy officials and as 
simpler implements borne in the hands of sculpted and painted bodhisattvas, 
most often of Guanyin in one of his new guises associated with dhāraṇī 
traditions, especially his Eleven- Headed and Thousand- Armed versions.31 The 
earliest clearly datable example is a relief sculpture of a two- armed and eleven- 
headed bodhisattva adorning the Qibaotai 七寶臺 (Tower of Seven Treasures) in 
the Guangzhai si 光宅寺 of Chang’an (modern Xi’an), which was commissioned 
around the year 703 by the Empress Wu zetian.32 In it, Guanyin holds upraised 
in his right hand a seal bearing the Chinese phrase miezui 滅罪, “Elimination 
of Sins,” a ritual statement that connects the image in a general way with the 
arcane arts of the seal practitioner, many of whose techniques, as we will see, 
heal through the elimination of the karmic burden of sins borne by the afflicted. 
Much more specifically, however, these words echo, and may have been an adaptation
of, a scriptural account of another bodhisattva’s seal, one employed to 
stamp the sign of the successful extinction of sin onto the body of the practitioner
of a form of Buddhist visionary repentance.
This seal is featured in an account from the kashmiri monk Tanmomiduo’s 
曇摩蜜多 (Dharmamitra, 356– 442, active in China after 424) translation of the 
Guan Xukongzang pusa jing 觀虛空藏菩薩經 (The Scripture on the Contemplation 
of the Bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha), a passage that, in Wu zetian’s day, had recently 
been republished in Daoshi’s 道世 (d. 683) thematic anthology of Buddhist 
teachings, Fayuan zhulin (“A Grove of Pearls from the Garden of the Dharma”). In 
the technique described, the practitioner is to beseech the aid of the bodhisattva 
Ākāśagarbha, whom he has envisioned in his mind (xiang 想) complete with a 
purple- gold maṇi gem, or “Wish- Fulfilling Jewel,” adorning the deity’s head. The 
scripture claims that the practitioner will have evidence that his prayers have 
worked if, later, either in a dream or in a vision attained during seated meditation,
the bodhisattva appears to him and stamps the practitioner’s arm with his 
maṇi gem.33 The text says that the seal will be marked with “words that wipe away 
sin” (chumie zi 除罪字), but that, if one does not see these words in the dream or 
vision, a voice will intone from the sky that “the sins are extinguished, the sins are 
31 See, for example, Wang, “Buddha Seal.”
32 Yen, “The Sculptures,” 53, 70– 74. See also Wong, “The Art of Avataṃsaka Buddhism,” 8; 
and Sørensen and Suchan, “Seal- Bearing Bodhisattvas,” 409– 10, and fig. 1.
33 one might speculate that the close connections between seals and maṇi gems in Buddhist 
ritual language and imagery, which is found across a wide body of material, may reflect the 
wide use of intaglio gems as seals across the ancient world.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 27SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
27
extinguished!” (zuimie zuimie 罪滅罪滅), using the very words (albeit in a different 
order) engraved on the seal of the Qibaotai Guanyin.34
The popularity of seal- bearing bodhisattvas in Buddhist visual culture 
through at least the Song period (960– 1279) appears to have been significant 
in areas ranging from the imperial capital to Dunhuang in the northwest and 
the Sichuan region in the southwest.35 other surviving Tang sculpted examples 
include a small (9.3 x 3.5 x 2.5 cm) gilt copper alloy votive statue in the collection 
of the Art Institute of Chicago of an eleven- headed and six- armed Guanyin, who 
bears in his middle right hand a stamp seal (see Plates 2.1 and 2.2). Painted icons 
of seal- bearing bodhisattvas from the Tang and the tenth century include at least 
four portable silk paintings of Guanyin grasping seals bearing swastikas— an 
image of blessings that is among the oldest and most important of all ritual seal 
emblems. These paintings were among the hoard of documents and images 
discovered in Mogao cave 17, near the city of Dunhuang, the ancient site of 
caravanserais along the overland Eurasian trade routes known today as the “silk 
roads.” of the four examples, three depict Thousand- Armed Guanyins: two (Stein 
Paintings 35 and 167) are eleven- headed and thousand- armed versions bearing 
their swastika seals in forward- positioned right hands; the other (Musée Guimet 
no. 17659) has a single head and bears its seal in a left hand at about shoulder 
height. The fourth (Musée Guimet no. 23076) depicts an image of a six- armed 
Amoghapāśa Guanyin bearing its swastika seal in its upper right hand. Perhaps 
the most striking image of all, and possibly the earliest of the extant painted 
images, is the mural of a Thousand- Armed Guanyin found in Mogao cave 148, 
dated as a whole to 776, where it is part of a very important program of dhāraṇī 
iconography— a fact that, along with the images just described, is striking evidence
of the place of seals within Buddhist incantatory traditions.36 The bodhi-
sattva holds in one of its most prominent and forward- positioned hands a seal 
inscribed with what appears to be a stylized swastika (perhaps integrated within 
a larger design intended to suggest the Chinese talismanic glyphs known as fu 符, 
or “cloud script,” among other names).37
34 Fayuan zhulin, Daoshi, comp., T no. 2122, 53: 913c, quoting Guan xukongzang pusa jing, 
Tanmomiduo, tr., T no. 409, 13: 677c.
35 Sørensen and Suchan, “Seal- Bearing Bodhisattvas.”
36 on the dhāraṇī bodhisattva programme in this cave, see, for example, Wong, “Divergent 
Paths.”
37 For an image of this bodhisattva and his seal, see Copp, “Manuscript Culture,” 208. 
on fu talismans and the broader category of talismanic writing in China, see Bumbacher, 
Empowered Writing, 57– 80, and passim.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 28 PAuL CoPP
28
The Dunhuang swastika emblems mark clear connections between Tang 
China and cultures to its west. one can, in fact, follow swastika- bearing objects 
seemingly like breadcrumbs from Indic and Central Asian sites to Dunhuang and 
beyond to Chang’an. The British Museum, for example, has a number of coins and 
tokens bearing the image discovered by Aurel Stein at various sites on the trade 
and pilgrimage routes to the west of Dunhuang. These, as well as a large number 
of seals and religious stamps discovered in India and Central Asia, provide ample 
evidence of the ways that Tang Buddhist seal practices drew in part on cultural 
sources outside China.38 But the evidence for Chinese sources for the practices and 
object figured in the bodhisattva icons is also compelling, and in many ways much 
more richly detailed. I explore the Indic and Central Asian sources elsewhere; in 
the remainder of this study I will turn my attention to the long history of ritualists’ 
seals in China and consider the ways that the Tang Buddhist material carried this 
history forward in new forms.
Plate 2.2. Detail of Plate 2.1: the hand 
bearing a stamp seal.
38 See my forthcoming book, Seal and Scroll.
Plate 2.1. Eleven- headed and six- armed Guanyin 
(Avalokiteśvara) standing on a lotus. China, Tang 
dynasty (618– 907), ca. ninth century. Gilt copper 
alloy, 9.3 x 3.5 x 2.5. Gift of C. A. Islinger in memory 
of his mother, Helen Islinger, 1982. Chicago, Art 
Institute of Chicago, 1676. Photo: the Art Institute of 
Chicago / Art Resource, NY.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 29SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
29
Ritualist’s Seals in Non- Buddhist China
Seals were everywhere in Chinese culture, dating back at least to the “Springs and 
Autumns” and “Warring States” periods, stretching from the end of the Western 
zhou Dynasty in 771 BCE to the full establishment of the Qin Empire in 221 BCE. 
Worn on the body or used to stamp clay bullas (fengni 封泥) or paper and silk 
documents and, later, paintings, seals were integral to a wide range of cultural 
practices, most prominently those of politics and commerce, but also those of 
romance and friendship, of connoisseurship and literati style, of Confucian ethical 
paths, and, most importantly for the purposes of this article, of a great variety of 
ways of healing, exorcism, protection, and conferring blessings.
one group of these religious seals, drawing on the logics of extended identity
and power inherent in uses of royal seals, bears the names of deities or the 
titles of the ritualists who invoked them. The “monarchs” represented in these 
practices were cosmic principalities, deities, and heavenly sovereigns. Certain 
tombs of the first century CE in China were found to contain small bronze seals 
whose inscriptions point directly to their bearers’ roles as agents of deities. We 
find inscriptions on the seals such as “Yellow Spirit” (huangshen 黃神), “Seal of 
the Yellow Spirit” (huangshen zhi yin 黃神之印), “Seal of the Heavenly Thearch” 
(tiandi zhi yin 天帝之印), “Seal of the Emissary of the Yellow Spirit” (huangshen 
shizhe yinzhang 黃神使者印章), and “Spiritual Master of the Heavenly Thearch” 
(tiandi shenshi 天帝神師), among others that reflect the ancient civil and cosmic 
functions of imperial seals. Aside from naming the titles of their bearers and the 
deities for whom the seals acted as agents, some early religious seals also named 
the particular rites for which they were crafted: in general, they were those that 
summoned and commanded spirits for the ritualists’ own uses or to expel or kill 
them in exorcistic rites. These examples include the seals marked “High Lord of the 
August Heaven’s Seal for the Control of the Myriad Spirits” (Huangtian shangdi zhi 
wanshen zhang 皇天上帝制萬神章) and the “Heavenly Thearch’s Demon- killing 
Seal” (Tiandi shagui zhi yin 天帝殺鬼之印).
Seals bearing the phrase Huangshen yuezhang 黃神越章, “Conquering 
Emblem of the Yellow Spirit,” are among the oldest and most storied of all 
Chinese ritual seals.39 The name invokes the renowned exorcistic might of the 
39 I follow Donald Harper’s convincing (but as yet tentative) reading of yue as having 
the sense of “overcoming” (personal communication, July 31, 2013), which draws on 
usage found on a bamboo manuscript dated ca. 209 BCE, from zhoujiatai 周家臺 tomb 
30, Hubei, and then later on the verso of the Dunhuang paper manuscript known today 
as Pelliot chinois no. 2661, where it is found in the text Zhu zalüe deyao chaozi yiben 
諸雜略得要抄子 (“Summation of the Various Miscellanies that obtains Their Essentials”). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 30 PAuL CoPP
30
Yellow Spirit, a version of the figure later better known as the Yellow Thearch 
(or “Emperor”), whose association in early China with a range of demonifugic 
techniques is widely evidenced.40 Seals with this name figure prominently in Ge 
Hong’s normative collection of religious lore, the Baopuzi 抱朴子, or The Master 
Who Embraces the Unhewn, and are singled out for excoriation by the fifth- century 
Buddhist monk Xuanguang 玄光 in his Bianhuo lun 辯惑論 (On Delusions). A tale 
of the potencies of the seal, furthermore, is contained in Du Guangting’s 杜光庭 
(850– 933) tenth- century collection of Daoist tales, Daojiao lingyan ji 道教靈驗記 
(Records of the Proven Efficacies of Daoism). The seal remained an important 
ritual implement in Daoist canons beyond the Song period, a fact made clear 
by the place of the seal in the great ritual collection titled the Daofa huiyuan 
道法會元 (Collected Daoist Rites). The history of the seal, in fact, is emblematic 
of the wider history of ritualists’ seals in China, which began as tools of Han- 
era spirit mediums and other occult masters and, over time, were borrowed by 
Buddhist and Daoist ritualists, and ultimately systematized within later Daoist 
and Buddhist traditions.
Among the earliest surviving actual examples of the seal is a Han- period 
stamp inscribed on two sides (Figure 2.1 a–b). Aside from “Huangshen yuezhang,” 
on its sealing face, it bears on its back a longer inscription, now largely illegible, 
which clearly marks the object as a demonifugic agent: the phrase “shagui zhi yin” 
殺鬼之印 (“demon- killing seal”) is among the few readable portions remaining.41 
Ge Hong’s account of the Huangshen yuezhang seal is part of his answer to the 
following question: “Those who practice the Way [weidaozhe 為道者] often find 
themselves in mountains and forests, where they are in danger from tigers and 
wolves— how can one avoid them?” Ge Hong replies,
Those of old who entered the mountains all wore on their belts the 
Huangshen yuezhang seal.42 In width it is four inches (cun 寸); its words 
In these cases, yue refers to the “overcoming” described in the “conquest sequence” of five 
agent theory. Compare Strickmann, Chinese Magical Medicine, 14. Strickmann also notes 
that some sources, such as Qianjin yifang, appear to take yuezhang as a proper name (ibid., 
318n43).
40 Liu, Kaogu faxian, 146– 47. See also zhao, “Luoyang chutu,” 69– 71. on the historical relationship
between the Yellow Spirit and the Yellow Thearch, etc., see Espesset, “Latter Han 
Religious Mass Movements,” 1077– 81, especially 1080.
41 Liu, Kaogu faxian, 140.
42 See Strickmann, Chinese Magical Medicine, 141, for a close paraphrase of this passage. 
I have followed his understanding of the passage at times in my translation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 31SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
31
number one hundred and twenty.43 use it to stamp clay bullas (fengni 封泥) 
and place them at the four directions, one hundred paces out, and neither 
tigers nor wolves will dare to enter it.
If, when traveling, you see fresh tiger tracks, then seal them in the same 
direction (shunyin zhi 順印之) if you want to make the tiger continue on 
as it was, or in the opposite direction (niyin zhi 逆印之) to make it turn 
around. Wear this seal when you travel in mountains and forests and you 
will not fear tigers or wolves. Not only will you not fear beasts, in fact, but 
should you come upon mountain and river shrines to blood- eating evil 
spirits, you will have the power to pass them by— take the seal and stamp 
clay bullas and use them to cut off their paths: they will no longer have the 
means to be spirits (bu fu neng shen 不復能神). of old, there was a great 
turtle- demon (dayuan 大黿) that dwelled within a deep pool of the Yangzi 
River, which for this reason people called the Turtle- Demon Pool. This creature
could perform devilries and spread illnesses among the people. In the 
Wu region there was a daoshi named Dai Bing 戴昞, who encountered it. He 
made a few hundred sealings in clay with his Yue Emblem, and then took 
43 Liu zhaorui notes that Ge Hong’s description of the seal does not match excavated Han- 
period examples, which he takes to indicate the likelihood that Huangshen yuezhang seals 
had fallen out of use by Ge’s time; not surprising, he notes, given that the cult of the Yellow 
Thearch itself had greatly diminished in the early medieval period— though, as we will see 
below, perhaps in part due to the importance of the Baopuzi itself, seals bearing the inscription
Huangshen yuezhang later appear to have remained in use through at least the Song 
period. Thus, Liu strongly implies, the Baopuzi’s accounts of “ancient” practices must be used 
with caution, and compared carefully with excavated evidence (Liu, Kaogu faxian, 151); this 
is a point whose importance I would like to underscore.
Figure 2.1a–b. Huangshen yuezhang seal, front (a) and back (b). After Wang, 
Daojiao fayin lingpai tan’ao, 20, figs. 21– 1, 21– 2.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 32 PAuL CoPP
32
a boat out onto the pool, dropping the sealings into it. After a good long 
while, the great turtle- demon— measuring over ten feet in length— floated 
paralyzed to the surface, where it was killed. All those afflicted with the 
illness were cured.44
Xuanguang’s text, from a century or so later, simply mentions the seal in passing, 
but lets us see that it was still understood as a demon killer: “Adepts [gaoxian 
高賢] … make the Huangshen yuezhang and use it to kill demons” [yongchi sha gui 
用持殺鬼].45
Further evidence of the seal’s storied demonifugic efficacies may be seen in 
the tenth- century Daojiao lingyan ji (Records of the Efficacies of Daoism) tale of 
the madman zhang Rang 張讓 and the Daoist adept (daoshi) Yuan Guizhen 袁歸真 
and his seal. zhang Rang, a native of Guizhou, was out travelling one day when 
he was struck down by a strange illness of the heart- mind. The symptoms at first 
were simple forgetfulness and a tendency to get easily lost and disoriented, but 
after several months their severity worsened, to the extent that zhang was often 
to be seen running around naked, utterly heedless of danger, and in fact injuring 
himself at times. To his rescue comes a Daoist named Yuan Guizhen wielding his 
newly carved Huangshen yuezhang seal. After completing the ritual preparations, 
Yuan takes his seal and seals zhang on his heart and back. zhang reacts violently 
and attempts to flee, but Yuan grabs hold of him and seals him once again, causing 
zhang to fall into a slumber. At this point, the tale reports, Yuan became confident
of the potency of his new seal. Employing cinnabar and burning incense, Yuan 
seals zhang once more upon his heart, which brings about his patient’s healing: a 
birdlike creature climbs out of zhang’s mouth and tries to fly away, but after a 
short distance it falls to the ground, where it is revealed to be a great bat, upon 
whose back the impression of Yuan’s seal is clear and distinct. zhang Rang makes a 
full recovery, and we are told that Yuan Guizhen went on to heal many others with 
his powerful sigil.46
The presence of this tale in the Daoist Canon suggests that the Huangshen 
yuezhang seal had been absorbed within certain of Daoism’s ritual canons by at 
44 Baopuzi neipian jiaoshi, 313. For other discussions of this last use of clay sealings as 
“depth charges,” see Strickmann, Chinese Magical Medicine, 141; and Barrett, “The Rise and 
Spread,” 9. For a clearly related use of a written Buddhist spell, see Tang Dajianfu si gu sizhu 
fanjing dade Fazang heshang zhuan, 284b.
45 Xuanguang, Bianhuo lun, in Sengyou 僧祐 (445– 518), comp. Hongmingji 弘明集 8, T 
no. 2102, 52: 49b.
46 Daojiao lingyan ji, 2650– 51. on this collection, see Verellen, “Evidential Miracles.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 33SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
3
least the Tang; and the rites for the seal contained in the Ming Daoist collection 
Daofa huiyuan, as elsewhere, demonstrate its full presence later in the religion— 
one in which seals had played a key role since its inception.47 In fact, although 
seals were employed in the Daoist religion from an early stage, and had become 
standard tools (along with spells, fu talismans, registers of spirits, the “Paces 
of Yu,” etc.) of Daoist priests by at least the Tang, scholars of Daoist seals seem 
unanimous in holding that the Song was the great period of their systematic 
absorption within the ritual systems of the religion. Li Yuanguo, for example, 
notes that most accounts of the nature and uses of seals in the Daoist Canon date 
to the Song and Yuan periods, and he emphasizes throughout his work the great 
richness of the material dating to this period (which lies beyond the purview of 
this survey).48
Buddhist Incantations and Seals in the Eighth and Ninth Centuries
As scholars such as Michel Strickmann have shown, Chinese Buddhists had 
incorporated these forms of religious seal practice into their scriptures by at least 
the middle of the fifth century, when the compilers of the Foshuo da guanding 
shenzhou jing 佛説大灌頂神呪經, the Great Spirit- Incantation Scripture of 
Consecration (hereafter, The Consecration Scripture), included a chapter featuring 
instructions for the making and use of stamp seals bearing the names of deities, 
the Foshuo guanding fumo fengyin da shenzhou jing 佛説灌頂伏魔封印大神呪經 
(“Demon- Defeating Seals of the Great Spirit- Incantation Scripture of Consecration”).49
Canonization in a scripture was likely a late stage in the absorption of 
a new practice, however; seals borrowed from native techniques would almost 
certainly have been found in the repertoires of Buddhist ritualists well before 
their scriptural enshrinements. In turn, the new forms, infused with the imagery 
and ideals of Buddhist dhāraṇī rites, helped to reshape the seal practices of non- 
Buddhists in later centuries. Their ongoing presence, and at times prominence, in 
47 on this collection, see Schipper and Verellen, eds., The Daoist Canon, 1105– 13. on the seal 
in this collection, see Wang, Daojiao fayin, 17. on seals in Daoism, see now Huang, “Daoist 
Seals, Part one.”
48 See, for example, Li, Daojiao fayin, 25– 27, 16ff. See also Ren, Daojiao zhangbiao fuyin 
wenhua, 251– 56.
49 The best studies in a Western language of this scripture remain those of Michel Strickmann, 
in his article “The Consecration Sūtra” and in his book Chinese Magical Medicine, 132– 40. The 
“scripture,” as scholars have pointed out, is in fact best understood as a collection of previously
independent scriptures, translated by a range of people. on the life of the seventh of 
its scriptures in seventh- century Silla korea, see kim, “(Dis)Assembling the National Canon.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 34 PAuL CoPP
34
Buddhist practice and iconography into the tenth century would very likely have 
been one reason for the new central places of seals in Daoist ritual beginning 
around that time.
The Consecration Scripture provides early evidence for new forms of religious
seal practice in China that would remain important through the tenth cen-
tury. Aside from corroborating the fact of their use by Chinese Buddhists in this 
period, the text makes clear that, by the fifth century, seals were to be made 
from wood, rather than bronze, the standard material of earlier seals.50 This 
was a key innovation in seal technology, which, as Wang Yucheng has noted, 
allowed for their easy manufacture by individual ritualists according to local 
requirements and timetables, and freed them from reliance on bronze smiths 
and expensive materials.51 Wood also enabled continuity with traditional 
practices of wearing seals on cords hanging from the belt, which were more 
and more out of date given newer trends in the Tang in both state and Daoist 
practice towards larger and heavier bronze seals, and eventually stone seals, 
representing not the individual minister but the office of the ministry itself. 
These seals, because of their new nature as well as their new heft, were to be 
kept and transported in special cases, rather than worn at the belt.52 This new 
practice left empty a space on the person that had long been a site of identity 
and social power. The re- emergence of personal non- state seals in the Tang, and 
the great growth of their popularity in later ages, can in part be traced to this 
change. Connected with these new trends, wooden religious seals could still be 
worn comfortably on a cord, and the Dunhuang Buddhist seal manuals to be 
discussed shortly call for this practice— as Daoist texts also continued to do at 
times. Another possibility enabled by wood as a material was a new emphasis, 
in seal accounts, on particular kinds of wood (and other substances) to be used 
in the making of the seals— practices that drew on long- standing Indic and 
Chinese medicinal and magical traditions about the special qualities of woods 
such as peach, pear, aloes, and others, including the “root of the Bodhi- Tree,” 
the species under which Gautama is said to have sat when he awoke as the 
Buddha. These innovations served to bring seals more tightly within the family 
of amuletic objects characteristic of medieval Chinese, and Chinese Buddhist, 
50 Wang (Daojiao fayin, 14) describes three phases in the history of ritual seals, in terms of 
their standard materials: bronze for early examples, bronze but also wood during the medieval
period, and then stone, beginning in the Song.
51 Wang, Daojiao fayin, 37.
52 Ibid. See also Wagner, “Chinese Seals,” 212.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 35SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
35
religious and medical practice. Finally, although it was not part of ritual practice,
another feature of wooden seals was the relative ease with which they 
could be forged, a possibility especially helpful in the faking of paintings and 
calligraphy, which by the Song commonly bore upon them the seal impressions 
of painters, collectors, and admiring literati.53
The relative freedom of the ritualist represented by (and in part made possible
by) wooden seals is vividly in evidence on manuscripts from ninth- and 
tenth- century Dunhuang, where it is clear that it was part of a larger culture of 
ritual modularity and improvisation. Four manuscripts now held in the Pelliot 
collection at the Bibliothèque nationale de France in Paris (Pelliot chinois nos. 
2153, 2602, 3835, and 3874) contain versions of a manual for the making and 
use of Buddhist talisman- seals (that is, seals inscribed with Chinese talismanic 
writing) that invoke the bodhisattva Guanshiyin Ruyilun 觀世音如意輪, a form 
of Guanyin popular in western China in the late Tang and tenth century, and the 
Indic deity Maṇibhadra (monibatuo 摩尼跋陀), often a patron of travellers.54 
The four manuscripts containing the seal manual seem to have been handbooks 
composed and used by practitioners of a local style of Buddhist ritual practice
strongly shaped throughout not only by Buddhist incantatory arts but also 
by native Chinese forms of the sort explored especially in preceding section of 
this study.
The seal manuals in particular appear to offer instructions for the manufacture
of instruments for the practices of Buddhist ritualists steeped in the 
same family of techniques employed by Daoists such as Yang Guizhen with his 
Huangshen yuezhang seal. Instead of embodying the powers of the Chinese Yellow 
Spirit, however, they invoked Buddhist spirits such as Guanyin, Maṇibhadra, and 
the Buddha himself; Buddhist spiritual states such as the meditative absorption 
known as samādhi; or spiritual and talismanic emblems of the tradition such as 
the lotus. The section on the “padma” (“lotus”) seal from Pelliot chinois no. 3835 
(Figure 2.2) gives a representative account of the making and use of a seal from 
53 See Wagner, “Chinese Seals,” 210. on the problems of forgery caused by the durability of 
seal impressions, see Platt, “Making an Impression,” 234.
54 The manuscripts lie at the heart of my forthcoming book, Seal and Scroll. For a preliminary
study of their importance for our understanding of Chinese Buddhist practice in the 
ninth and tenth centuries, see Copp, “Manuscript Culture.” other studies of one or two of 
the manuscript versions include Wang, Daojiao fayin, 41– 53; Li, Dunhuang Mijiao wenxian, 
104– 17; Gao, Zhongguo wushu shi, 451– 55; Xiao, Daojiao yu Mizong, 187– 94; and Strickmann, 
Chinese Magical Medicine, 166– 69.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 36 PAuL CoPP
36
Figure 2.2. Padma seal: detail from Pelliot chinois no. 3835 verso. The inscription on 
the seal face reads: “Guanshiyin. The talisman is an announcement.” After Bibliothèque 
nationale de France, ed., Faguo guojia tushuguan cang Dunhuang xiyu wenxian, vol. 28, 312.
the manuals. As with the other seal accounts, it is framed as the words of Guanyin 
spoken to the Buddha:
World- Honored one, this seal is the padma seal. It has great spiritual 
power. Carve the seal from white sandalwood and if you seal the body, 
[the body] will immediately glow with great radiance and the great earth 
will move with the six kinds of earthquakes. If you take the seal and seal 
the great earth it will transform into gold and jade. Wherever you stand, 
if you take the seal and shine it upon the four quarters all will be made 
jewel- like. If one desires to see me, use the seal to seal one’s eyes— one 
will immediately see my true body. If one desires to see the pure lands of 
the ten quarters all together before one’s eyes, one must only be pure and 
not chaotic [in one’s body and mind]. If one is chaotic in body and mind 
then the seal will not work and one’s only hope is to call out to the Buddha 
for help.
At least three of the characteristic elements of religious seal use in medieval China are 
present in this account: the use of special woods chosen for their particular efficacies 
in ritual and medicine (elsewhere in the manuals aloeswood, birthwort, and three 
forms of sandalwood, including the white and purple varieties, are prescribed); the 
association of the seal with a deity, here the bodhisattva Guanyin, whose name is 
to be inscribed on the face of the stamp just as that of the Yellow Spirit was on the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 37SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
37
Huangshen yuezhang seals; and the ritual gesture of “shining,” or pointing, the seal 
as a way of directing its potencies, recalling the ritual use of mirrors in Chinese religious
practice. Such continuities with traditional accounts of native Chinese sealing 
rites (and they include wider connections with native claims about spells and 
amulets) offer especially vivid evidence, both because of their extended and explicit 
nature and for the simple fact that they are found in excavated sources, of the place 
of Buddhists within the broader Chinese culture of religious ritual practice.55
The padma seal, and the manuscript manuals more generally, also represent one 
of the most striking transformations in the nature of Buddhist seal matrices in the 
Tang: the increased presence on them of the Chinese religious pseudo- script known 
loosely as fu, or “talismans,” in studies of Chinese religion, and the attendant birth 
of the “talisman seal” (fuyin), which by this time had become a standard form of 
ritual seal in religious practice.56 Note that the normal Chinese text to be inscribed 
on the padma seal, which is paired with talismanic script, explicitly labels it a fu, 
while the other seals in the manuals, though not so labelled, all feature versions of 
the talismanic script on their faces. Whereas earlier ritual seals, as we have seen, 
had tended to be in scripts legible to most educated Chinese, the combination of fu 
talisman and seal made the latter objects as mysterious and esoteric as the former.57 
This trend over time towards talisman seals (and, in what was likely a parallel trend, 
swastika seals) is evident in the Buddhist material. While the early seal inscriptions 
described in the Consecration Sūtra— simple names of deities, echoing early seal 
practice— were clearly to be written legibly, already by the early Tang talisman seals 
had become normal in Buddhism. They may have been widespread in other Tang 
practical traditions, as well: Sun Simiao’s 孫思邈 (trad. 581– 682) Qianjin yifang 
千金翼方 (Ancillary Methods Worth a Thousand Gold), for example, lists talisman 
seals among five techniques for emergency medical care, along with medicinal soup 
(tangyao 湯藥), acupuncture and moxibustion (zhenjiu 鍼灸), incantations (jinzhou 
禁咒), and psycho- physical training (daoyin 導引).58
55 For broad studies of this culture, see Harper, “Warring States” (along with many other of 
his works); Mollier, Buddhism and Daoism; and Campany, Making Transcendents.
56 As noted earlier, for a recent comprehensive study of fu talismans and talismanic writing 
in medieval Chinese religion, see Bumbacher, Empowered Writing.
57 Wang, Daojiao fayin, 38. It should be noted, however, that even early seals at times 
contained diagrams and (apparently) simple pictures, which made their distinction with 
the “mysteriousness” of fu talismans less sharp. See, for example, the Tiandi shagui zhi yin 
天帝殺鬼之印 seals discussed in Liu, Kaogu faxian, 139.
58 Sun, Qianjin yifang jiaozhu, 813. It should be noted that fayin might also refer to “talismans 
and seals.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 38 PAuL CoPP
38
Seals as Both Conceptual and Ritual Tools
As noted earlier, ritual seals (such as fu talismans and other Chinese ritual 
instruments and techniques) were mainly absorbed within dhāraṇī incantation 
rites of Buddhism, and later within the more systematic texts and practices of 
the Tang (and Japanese) Esoteric traditions, which drew heavily on the earlier 
incantatory traditions.59 Seals, indeed, were key parts of the East Asian dhāraṇī 
and Esoteric movements, and not only because of the presence of actual seals 
in their rites. Just as importantly, seals (drawing from the received Indic tradition)
provided a chief metaphor for spells and for the natures of deities invoked 
in their rites. We have already seen, in the opening section of this study, some of 
the metaphorical functions of “seal” in Buddhist conceptions of reality and of the 
relationships between teachers and students. Here in the incantatory literature 
we see seals as foundational to conceptions of ritual action. Incantations themselves
were often called seals, and dhāraṇīs in particular were seen in Buddhism to 
bear essential likenesses to seals. We see this in the term “dhāraṇī- seal,” common 
across the Buddhist world, which the scholar of Tibetan Buddhism Janet Gyatso 
has described as “the condensation of many symbols into one via the principles 
of dhāraṇī practice.” Spells in this sense, she goes on— and reflecting the “Seal 
of the Buddha” discussed earlier— “function as concrete and tangible emblems” 
employed to “seal all phenomena.”60 These shared features of spell and seal in 
Buddhist incantatory literature contributed, at times, to a shared logic of ritual 
action and marked their membership in a tight family of ritual techniques.
A final example— that of the functional identity of stamp seal and hand seal 
(or mudrā) in Buddhist incantatory discourse and practice— sheds further light on 
the marriage of the conceptual and the physical at the heart of Chinese religious 
sealing. As Strickmann notes in his study of the early Chinese Buddhist seal texts, 
the authors of those works took both forms of seal to be members of the same 
class of thing.61 Both the early scriptures studied by Strickmann and the much later 
Dunhuang texts tell ritualists to bring “seals,” whether carved blocks or their own 
interwoven fingers, to bear on clients’ bodies for much the same purposes and 
in much the same ways. Their common membership within the same continuum 
of “seal” is not only found in manuals of incantatory ritual that can seem marginal
to the mainstream of medieval Chinese Buddhism (especially when they are 
parts of texts found only in scarce manuscript editions from peripheral locales); 
59 See, for example, Xiao, Daojiao yu Mizong, 187, which provides a list of texts featuring seals.
60 Gyatso, “Letter Magic,” 186.
61 Strickmann, Chinese Magical Medicine, 137.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 39SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
39
it also occurs in at least one text of an elite Buddhist thinker of the cultural 
centre. Li Tongxuan 李通玄 (ca. 635– 730), a pre- eminent exegete and philosopher
of the Tang Huayan 華嚴 tradition (and a writer much cited in later korean 
and Japanese Buddhism), in a comment on the referents of the words for seal, 
yin 印 and xi 璽, used in the Avataṃsaka Sūtra (Huayan jing 華嚴經), the Flower 
Garland Scripture, appears to equate three basic kinds of seals. He explains that 
the terms refer to “the hand- seals formed during incantation practice” (zhouzhong 
jie shouyin 咒中結手印); to the jade seals (xi) employed by kings; and to bronze, 
iron, and wooden seals (yin). Li associates the latter seals with precisely the kinds 
of Buddhist ritual stamps that are the focus of this essay, in particular the “talisman
seals of Nāgārjuna, and others” (Longshu deng fuyin 龍樹等符印), clearly 
a reference to the Chinese tradition of exorcistic and therapeutic rites associated 
with Nāgārjuna (and separately, or often with him, of Aśvaghosa), which thrived 
during the Tang and Song periods. The Dunhuang Ruyilun seal manuals appear to 
have been part of this loose tradition; they are attributed in part to Aśvaghosa, and 
Nāgārjuna’s shows up in associated materials.
By far the most vivid representative, however, is the collection of talisman, 
seal, and other ritual methods known as the Longshu wuming lun 龍樹五明論 
(Nāgārjuna’s Treatise on the Five Sciences), a fascinating manual of rites that 
apparently circulated widely in some form in early eighth- century China (though 
it survives today only in a single manuscript held in the collection of Ishiyama- 
dera 石山寺 in Japan).62 It is not possible to know if Li Tongxuan was referring 
specifically to some version of this text or to others in the broad family of occult 
techniques associated with Nāgārjuna, some of which were reported as late as the 
twelfth century by Hong Mai 洪邁 (1123– 1202) in his Yijian zhi 夷堅志, where 
they were part of a culture of widely available demonifugic amulets and devices 
of various kinds.63 Yet it is clear that Li saw demonifugic stamps as being forms of 
seals comparable to mudrās formed by the hands.
Mudrās were employed in a wide range of Esoteric and incantatory rituals in 
the same ways that stamp seals were. In the Tuoluoni ji jing 陀羅尼集經 (Dhāraṇī 
Collection Scripture), for example, a work dating from the early 650s, one finds 
accounts such as the description of the “Seal and Spell of the Buddha- vajra that 
stops all poisonous creatures” (Fo bazhela zhi yiqie duchong yin zhou 佛跋折囉止
一切毒蟲印呪). After describing how to interlock the fingers of one’s two hands 
62 Xin Huayan jing lun, 895b.
63 For a translation of a Yijian zhi passage describing occult techniques, invoking Nāgārjuna, 
that Hongmai claims were practised by his own brother, see Davis, Society and the 
Supernatural, 149. on the wide availability of talismans, spells, and other occult techniques 
in Hong Mai’s day, see Boltz, “Not by the Seal,” 266.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 40 PAuL CoPP
40
in a precise way and giving the spell to be intoned, the text describes how one 
should “seal” the afflicted area with the hand seal. Hand seals may have simply 
been substituted for stamp seals in certain healing rites, at least in passages such 
as these. The application of the hand seal is described in the text— and in many 
others— in the same way as that of stamp seals: “[S] eal them with the seal” (yi yin 
yinzhi 以印印之).
The use of hand seals in these rites likely contributed to the decline in the 
popularity of stamps, at least within the formal ritual traditions evidenced by 
canonical texts. Simply as a matter of convenience, after all, mudrās were quite 
literally readier to hand.64 The centrality of hand seals in rituals (and texts and 
images) of the then burgeoning Esoteric Buddhist tradition— imported from India 
and Central Asia, which did not share China’s ancient culture of ritualist seals— 
would likely also have been a factor in this change. It is clear, at any rate, that, in 
transmitted texts of the seventh century and later, stamps are rarely seen, while 
hand seals and talismanic spell inscriptions are common. Li Tongxuan’s comments 
aside, the term yin in Buddhist ritual texts of the Tang nearly always indicates a 
hand seal rather than a stamp.
This is not to say that stamp seals disappeared entirely from Buddhist practice
in China. Although they do seem to have vanished, at least for the most part, 
from the high ritual canons, their practices continued to be viable not only in the 
Dunhuang region (and in Japan), where ritual manuals for their use survive, but 
also in a much wider region, stretching at least from the Shazhou area of the northwest
to Sichuan in the southwest and beyond, where paintings and sculptures from 
the eighth century through the end of the imperial period suggest the presence 
of the practice— and are further suggestive as well, especially in the cases of the 
multi- armed Guanyin imagery, of the continued interchangeability of stamp seal 
and mudrā in some ritual contexts.65
Conclusion
Seals and ideas of seals, as this survey has begun to show, were central to many 
forms of medieval Chinese religious practice and thought. Moreover, essentially 
all elements of sealing were taken into them: the central trope of identity and the 
central function of physical transmission; the various styles of wearing seals and 
of using them to make impressions; and both seal matrices and seal impressions 
64 Strickmann, Chinese Magical Medicine, 159.
65 See Sørensen and Suchan, “Seal- Bearing Bodhisattvas,” for a few later examples of seals 
found in Esoteric ritual manuals from China and Japan.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 41SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
41
in various styles. The forms of everyday social magic associated with seals readily 
translated to Chinese religious and philosophical use.
Within Buddhism in medieval China, and reflecting its history there more 
generally, the use of ritual and conceptual seals was an amalgam of local Chinese 
and imported Indic and Central Asian practices and ideas. The history of religious 
seals and sealing in China, indeed, provides especially clear evidence for the transformations
in eastern Eurasian religious practice that followed upon the eastward 
spread of Buddhism. The nature of these transformations can be understood, at 
least initially, through an analytical dyad with its own long history in the study of 
Chinese Buddhism: sinification versus Indic conquest.66 From one angle, the seals 
and their practices provide especially clear examples of what scholars have long 
called the “sinification” of Buddhism— the ways that Buddhism was transformed 
in Chinese history to make it conform to Chinese practices and worldviews. The 
bodhisattva Guanyin, the Chinese form of the South Asian figure Avalokiteśvara, 
to take one example from this study, was reimagined in seal practices in part as 
a traditional Chinese healer and ritualist, wielding a stamp of the kind that— and 
in ways that— Chinese spirit mediums and Daoist priests had done for centuries. 
Indeed, as we have seen, more than simply as a Chinese ritualist, Avalokiteśvara 
was reimagined as a Chinese deity, his identity embodied in the form of a seal. on 
the more purely conceptual side, received Indic philosophical metaphors of the 
“Seal of the Buddha” and the “Mind Seal” were, during the period studied here, 
fully translated into local styles of the Chinese literatus and the Chan master, both 
figured as members of family lineages.
Applying the “conquest” framework, in contrast, we see that Indic images 
and practices just as clearly wrought profound transformations on centuries- old 
Chinese techniques and concepts of ritual sealing. Indic, or Indic- inspired, mudrās, 
or “seals,” made with the hands, replaced Chinese stamp seals in most Buddhist 
rituals— as well as (in material not covered in this survey) in many rites of the 
Daoist religion from around the year 1000 CE onwards. on the more purely conceptual
side here, too, Indic Buddhist metaphors of “Buddha Seals” profoundly shaped 
Chinese understandings of the nature of reality. And not only in Buddhism: as this 
study has also shown, it found its way into Daoist religious discourse as well, providing
new discourses of the very Dao itself.
The hybrid ways of sealing born from the marriage of Indic and Chinese 
practices helped to provide new and vital forms of Chinese Buddhist ritual practice 
in the period studied in this article. Although the prominence of physical seals in 
66 The two frameworks are well represented by Gregory, Tsung- mi; and zürcher, The 
Buddhist Conquest.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 PAuL CoPP
42
medieval Chinese Buddhism is most famous within the highly systematic imported 
versions of the religion known as Esoteric, or Tantric, it was within a much broader 
and looser family of localized ritual practices centring incantations, amulets, and 
a range of ritual techniques and objects— including seals— that this hybrid culture
of seal practice had its most vibrant life. In them, Indic mudrā and the seals 
of the Chinese spirit medium were combined in artful ways, and substituted for 
each other in a range of practices. These objects and techniques, as this study 
has begun to explore, are widely evidenced in material culture and manuscript 
finds across East Asia. Notably, however, they are much less apparent in the elite 
printed scriptural canons that have mainly shaped modern understandings of 
the nature of Buddhism in the Chinese medieval period. Close study of Buddhist 
seals, in all their forms, thus helps to unearth what has long been a hidden, perhaps
even a suppressed, mainstream of medieval Chinese Buddhist practice: a 
world of Buddhist (and Daoist) ritualists, and of the painters and sculptors who 
depicted them.
 
 
 43SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
43
Bibliography
Abbreviations
T. Takakusu Juǌirō, Watanabe kaigyoku, and ono Gemyo, eds. Taishō shinshū 
daizōkyō 大正新修大藏經, 100 vols. Tokyo: Taishō issaikyō kankōkai, 1924– 32.
Primary Sources
Bibliothèque nationale de France, ed. Faguo guojia tushuguan cang Dunhuang xiyu 
wenxian 法國國家圖書館藏敦煌西域文獻, 34 vols. Shanghai: Shanghai guji, 
1994.
Du Guangting. Daojiao lingyan ji. Yunji qiqian 雲笈七籤 ed. Beijing: zhonghua 
shuju, 2003.
Huayan yisheng jiaoyi fenqi zhang 華嚴一乘教義分齊章. T no. 1866.
Jingde chuandeng lu 景德傳燈錄. T no. 2076.
Tang Dajianfu si gu sizhu fanjing dade Fazang heshang zhuan 
唐大薦福寺故寺主翻經大德法 藏和尚傳. T no. 2054.
Xin Huayan jing lun 新華嚴經論. T no. 1739.
Secondary Sources
Barrett, T. H. “Images of Printing in Seventh Century Chinese Literature.” Chinese 
Science 15 (1998): 81– 93.
——  . “The Rise and Spread of Printing: A New Account of Religious Factors.” 
Working Paper in the Study of Religions. London: School of oriental and 
African Studies, 2001.
Bedos- Rezak, Brigitte Miriam. “From Ego to Imago: Mediation and Agency in 
Medieval France (1000– 1250).” Haskins Society Journal 14 (2003): 151– 74.
—— . When Ego Was Imago: Signs of Identity in the Middle Ages. Leiden: Brill, 2011.
Betts, John H. “Minoan and Mycenaean Seals.” In 7000 Years of Seals, edited by 
Dominique Collon, 54– 73.
Boltz, Judith Magee. “Not by the Seal of office Alone: New Weapons in Battles with 
the Supernatural.” In Religion and Society in T’ang and Sung China, edited by 
Patricia Buckley Ebrey and Peter N. Gregory, 241– 305. Honolulu: university of 
Hawaii Press, 1993.
Bumbacher, Stephan Peter. Empowered Writing: Exorcistic and Apotropaic Rituals 
in Medieval China. St. Petersburg: Three Pines Press, 2012.
Callieri, Pierfrancesco. Seals and Sealings from the North- West of the Indian 
Subcontinent and Afghanistan (4th Century BC– 11th Century AD): Local, Indian, 
Sasanian, Graeco- Persian, Sogdian, Roman. Naples: Istituto universitario 
orientale di Napoli, 1997.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 44 PAuL CoPP
4
Campany, Robert. Making Transcendents: Ascetics and Social Memory in Early 
Medieval China. Honolulu: university of Hawaii Press, 2009.
Cassin, Elena. “Le sceau: un fait de civilization dans la Mésopotamie ancienne.” 
Annales: Économies, sociétés, civilisations 15 (1960): 742– 51.
Charpin, Dominique. Reading and Writing in Babylon. Translated by Jane Marie 
Todd. Cambridge, MA: Harvard university Press, 2010.
Collon, Dominique, ed. 7000 Years of Seals. London: British Museum Press, 1997.
Copp, Paul. “Manuscript Culture as Ritual Culture in Late Medieval Dunhuang: 
Buddhist Talisman- Seals and Their Manuals.” Cahiers d’Extrême- Asie 20 (2011): 
193– 226.
Davis, Edward L. Society and the Supernatural in Song China. Honolulu: university 
of Hawaii Press, 2002.
Dikshit, M. G. “Cunningham Collection of Seals in the British Museum.” Journal of 
the Numismatic Society of India 22 (1960): 123– 90.
Espesset, Grégoire. “Latter Han Religious Mass Movements and the Early Daoist 
Church.” In Early Chinese Religion, part 1: Shang through Han (1250 BC– 220 AD), 
edited by John Lagerwey and Marc kalinowski, vol. 2, 1117– 58. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
Gao Guofan 高國藩. Zhongguo wushu shi 中國巫術史. Shanghai: Shanghai 
Sanlian, 1999.
Gonda, Jan. “Mudrā.” Studies in the History of Religions 12 (1972): 21– 31.
Gray, David B. “Imprints of the ‘Great Seal:’ on the Expanding Semantic Range 
of the Term of Mudrā in Eighth through Eleventh Century Indian Buddhist 
Literature.” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 34 
(2011): 421– 82.
Gregory, Peter N. Tsung- mi and the Sinification of Buddhism. Honolulu: university 
of Hawaii Press, 2002.
Gyatso, Janet. “Letter Magic: A Peircean Perspective on the Semiotics of Rdo Grub- 
Chen’s Dhāraṇī Memory.” In In the Mirror of Memory: Reflections on Mindfulness 
and Remembrance in Indian and Tibetan Buddhism, edited by Janet Gyatso, 
173– 213. Albany: State university of New York Press, 1992.
Harper, Donald. “Warring States: Natural Philosophy and occult Thought.” In The 
Cambridge History of Ancient China, edited by Michael Loewe and Edward L. 
Shaughnessy, 813– 84. Cambridge: Cambridge university Press, 1999.
Harrison, Paul. The Pratyutpanna Samādhi Sutra (with The Śūraṅgama Samādhi 
Sutra). Translated by John McRae. BDk English Tripiṭaka 25- II, 25- III. 
Berkeley: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research, 1998.
Hou Chin- lang. “La cérémonie du yin- cha- fo d’après les manuscrits de Touen- 
houang.” In Contributions aux études sur Touen- houang, edited by Michel Soymié, 
vol. 3, 205– 35. Paris: École française d’Extrême- orient, 1984.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 45SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
45
Huang, Shih- Shan Susan. “Daoist Seals, Part one: Activation and Fashioning.” 
Journal of Daoist Studies 10 (2017): 70– 101.
Jia, Jinhua. The Hongzhou School of Chan Buddhism in Eighth- through Tenth- 
Century China. Albany: State university of New York Press, 2006.
kim, Youn- mi. “(Dis)Assembling the National Canon: Seventh- Century ‘Esoteric’ 
Buddhist Ritual, the Samguk Yusa, and Sach’ǒngwang- Sa.” In New Perspectives 
on Early Korean Art: From Silla to Koryŏ, edited by Youn- mi kim, 123– 91. 
Cambridge, MA: korea Institute, Harvard university, 2013.
Li Xiaorong 李小榮. Dunhuang Mijiao wenxian lungao 敦煌密教文獻論稿. Beijing: 
Renmin wenxue, 2003.
Li Yuanguo 李遠國. Daojiao fayin mizang 道教法印秘藏. zhanghua: Lingbao 
chubanshe, 2002.
Liu zhaorui 劉昭瑞. Kaogu faxian yu zaoqi Daojiao yanjiu 考古發現與早期道教
研究. Beijing: Wenwu, 2007.
Mollier, Christine. Buddhism and Daoism Face to Face: Scripture, Ritual, and 
Iconographic Exchange in Medieval China. Honolulu: university of Hawaii 
Press, 2008.
—— . “Talismans.” In Divination et société dans le Chine médiévale: étude des 
manuscrits de Dunhuang de la Bibliothèque nationale de France et de la British 
Library, edited by Marc kalinowski, 405– 29. Paris: Bibliothèque nationale de 
France, 2004.
Niizeki kinya 新関欽哉. Tōzai yinshōshi 東西印章史. Tokyo: Tokyodo, 1995.
Paper, Jordan. The Spirits Are Drunk: Comparative Approaches to Chinese Religion. 
Albany: State university of New York Press, 1995.
Parpola, Asko. “Seals of the Greater Indus Valley.” In 7000 Years of Seals, edited by 
Dominique Collon, 47– 53.
Platt, Verity. “Burning Butterflies: Seals, Symbols, and the Soul in Antiquity.” In 
Pagans and Christians— from Antiquity to the Middle Ages: Papers in Honour of 
Martin Henig, Presented on the Occasion of His 65th Birthday, edited by Lauren 
Gilmour, 89– 99. oxford: Archaeopress, 2007.
—— . “Making an Impression: Replication and the ontology of the Graeco- Roman 
Seal Stone.” Art History 29 (2006): 233–57.
Ren zongquan 任宗权. Daojiao zhangbiao fuyin wenhua yanjiu 
道教章表符印文化研究. Beijing: zongjiao wenhua chubanshe, 2006.
Rosaia, Roberto Lucio, Marzia Ratti, and Euro Capellini. Les sceaux: empreintes du 
pouvoir. Translated [from the Italian] by Maria Laura Bardinet Broso. Paris: 
Éditions Langlaude, 2001.
Schipper, kristofer, and Franciscus Verellen, eds. The Daoist Canon: A Historical 
Companion to the Daozang. Chicago: university of Chicago Press, 2004.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 46 PAuL CoPP
46
Schlingloff, D. “Stamp Seal of a Buddhist Monastery.” Journal of the Numismatic 
Society of India 31 (1969): 69– 70.
Sørensen, Henrik, and Tom Suchan. “Seal- Bearing Bodhisattvas in the Sculptural 
Art of Sichuan and the Significance of Seals within the Esoteric Buddhist 
Tradition.” Artibus Asiae 73 (2013): 403– 43.
Strickmann, Michel. Chinese Magical Medicine. Stanford: Stanford University 
Press, 2002.
—— . “The Consecration Sūtra.” In Chinese Buddhist Apocrypha, edited by Robert 
Buswell, 75– 118. Honolulu: university of Hawaii Press, 1990.
Sun Simiao 孙思邈. Qianjin yifang jiaozhu 千金翼方校注. Shanghai: Shanghai 
guji, 1999.
Tan Chanxue 譚蟬雪. “Yinsha, tuofo, tuota” 印沙, 脫佛, 脫塔. Dunhuang yanjiu 
(1989): 19– 29.
Thoreau, Henry David. The Journal 1837– 1861. New York: New York Review Books 
Classics, 2009.
Verellen, Franciscus. “Evidential Miracles in Support of Taoism: The Inversion 
of a Buddhist Apologetic Tradition in Late Tang China.” T’oung Pao 78 
(1992): 217– 63.
Wagner, Lothar. “Chinese Seals.” In 7000 Years of Seals, edited by Dominique Collon, 
205– 22.
Wang, Eugene. “Buddha Seal.” In Buddhist Sculpture from China: Selections from the 
Xi’an Beilin Museum, Fifth through Ninth Centuries, edited by Annette L. Juliano, 
118– 22. New York: China Institute Gallery, 2007.
Wang Sanqing 王三慶 and Wang Yayi 王雅儀. “Dunhuang wenxian yinshafo 
wen de zhengli yanjiu” 敦煌文獻印沙佛文的整理研究. Dunhuang xue 26 
(2005): 45– 74.
Wang Yucheng 王育成. Daojiao fayin lingpai tan’ao 道教法印令牌探奧. 
Beijing: zongjiao wenhua, 2000.
Wong, Dorothy. “The Art of Avataṃsaka Buddhism at the Courts of Empress Wu 
and Emperor Shōmu/ Empress kōmyō.” In Avataṃsaka Buddhism in East 
Asia: Huayan, Kegon, Flower Ornament Buddhism: Origins and Adaptation of 
a Visual Culture, edited by Robert Gimello, Frédéric Girard, and Imre Hamar, 
223– 60. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 2012.
—— . “Divergent Paths: Representations of Amoghapāśa in East, South, and 
Southeast Asia.” unpublished paper.
Xiao Dengfu 蕭登福. Daojiao yu Mizong 道教與密宗. Taipei: Hsin- wen- feng, 1993.
Yen, Chuan- ying. “The Sculptures from the Tower of Seven Jewels: The Style, 
Patronage and Iconography of the Monument.” unpublished PhD diss., Harvard 
university, 1986.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 47SEALS AS CoNCEPTuAL AND RITuAL TooLS
47
zhao zhenhua 趙振華. “Luoyang chutu ‘huangshen,’ ‘zhidu zongshe’ Daojiao fayin 
kao” 洛陽 出土“黃神，“治都總攝,’ 道教法印考. Zhongyuan wenwu 中原文物 
(2007): 69– 71.
zhou Xiaolu 周曉陸, ed. Ershi shiji chutu xiyin jicheng 二十世紀出土璽印集成, 
3 vols. Beijing: zhonghua shuju, 2010.
zürcher, Erik. The Buddhist Conquest of China: The Spread and Adaptation of 
Buddhism in Early Medieval China. Leiden: Brill, 1959.
 
 
 
 
 
 48 PAuL CoPP
48
Paul Copp (pcopp@uchicago.edu; PhD Princeton university, 2005) is associate 
professor in Chinese religion and thought at the university of Chicago. His work 
centres on the material history of personal religious practice in eighth- through 
thirteenth- century China, focusing especially on manuscripts, xylographs, and 
other archaeological evidence discovered at “silk road” sites such as Dunhuang, 
Turfan, and khara- khoto. He is the author of The Body Incantatory: Spells and 
the Ritual Imagination in Medieval Chinese Buddhism (Columbia university 
Press, 2014) and is co- editor, with Wu Hung, of Refiguring East Asian Religious 
Art: Buddhist Devotion and Funerary Practice (university of Chicago Press, 2018). 
The present study is drawn from work towards a new book, tentatively titled “Seal 
and Scroll: Manuscripts and the Ritualist’s Craft at Dunhuang and Beyond.”
Abstract In medieval China, this article demonstrates, nearly all forms of seals 
and sealing— both physical and metaphorical— were translated to use in religious 
practice: tropes of identity and material transmission; multiple styles of wearing 
and impressing seals; and the many forms of physical matrix and impression. This 
article focuses on the place of seals within Buddhism in China, especially within 
a broad family of localized ritual practices centring on incantations, amulets, and 
other ritual techniques and objects. Reflecting Buddhism’s history there more generally,
its uses of seals were amalgams of local Chinese and imported Indic and 
Central Asian practices.
Keywords seals, sealing, Buddhism, Daoism, China, ritual, ritualist, talismans, 
amulets, metaphor
