Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za doi:10.4102/hts.v67i3.944
Self-transcendence and Eros: The human condition 
between desire and the infinite
Author:
Cornel W. du Toit1
Affiliation:
1Research Institute for 
Theology and Religion, 
University of South Africa, 
South Africa
Correspondence to:
Cornel du Toit
Email:
dtoitcw@unisa.ac.za
Postal address:
PO Box 392, Unisa 003, 
South Africa
Dates:
Received: 17 Aug. 2010
Accepted: 30 Oct. 2010
Published: 12 July 2011
How to cite this article:
Du Toit, C.W., 2011, ‘Selftranscendence
and Eros: 
The human condition 
between desire and the 
infinite’, HTS Teologiese 
Studies/Theological Studies 
67(3), Art. #944, 12 pages. 
doi:10.4102/hts.v67i3.944
This article treats self-transcendence – like all transcendence – as a fact of human life. Inter 
alia this means that the human mind perforce operates in terms of binary concepts such as 
finitude–infinity, inner world–outside world, self–other, desire–fulfilment, separation–union 
and the like. We find these concepts in most myths of origin. The concept of desire (Eros), 
combining unfulfilment and the infinite, particularly epitomises self-transcendence. Ralph 
Waldo Emerson is cited as a precursor of the mid-19th century transcendentalists, whose ideas 
are resurfacing in present-day secular spirituality. In this article, we examined desire in the 
Christian conception of the Fall as envisioned by the Jewish philosopher Martin Buber and by 
Hegel, who integrates mind and nature in his philosophy of Spirit. The works of Emmanuel 
Levinas and Paul Ricoeur are used as points of reference to help us understand self and 
other in a framework of self-transcendence. The impact of these ideas on a postmetaphysical 
epistemology was also explored. Affectivity is a neglected area in Western thought and 
displays the same infinitude as rationality. The article concluded with present-day strategies 
of self-construction in a techno-scientific consumer culture. 
© 2011. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.
Introduction 
Transcendence and post-transcendence 
Ours is a post-transcendent era. Human dogma has unravelled God, metaphysics has unravelled 
existence and science has unravelled the cosmos. People have become transparent to each other 
and no longer relate. The world around us has become explicable and we are left disillusioned in 
a disenchanted environment. The postmodern mind mourns the loss of mystery, the challenge 
of the unknown, the desirable and enticing, and the loss of an enchanted world. When we 
speak of the death of God, the end of metaphysics, the end of subjectivity and the technological 
transformation of nature, we are actually speaking of a loss of transcendent experience. We do 
not merely mourn the loss but are continually looking for new experiences of transcendence. Yet 
does a statement like ‘the death of God’ not rule out any experience of radical transcendence?1 
We need to redefine transcendence for those who no longer believe that our world is governed 
by such unknown forces. Metaphysical constructs that were once used to describe supernatural 
forces (good or evil) have lost their plausibility. Our world is subject to laws of nature and these 
laws, rather than miracles or supernatural forces, rule our destiny. The role of transcendent 
forces in people’s personal lives, too, is questioned. We should not look for divine or impersonal 
agents to explain misfortunes that befall us. Evil, suffering and injustice are part of life, of our 
particular society, or simply coincidence. Does that mean that human life has become onedimensionally
immanent, or is it merely a new phase in our mental evolution? The transcendent 
(unknown forces and influences) has not vanished from human life, but is at most regarded as 
an immanent factor residing mainly in the self. Transcendence, in the sense of unpredictable, 
unfathomable but also exciting and innovative forces, is to be found in the unconscious, the 
imagination, dreams, conscience, desire and fantasy. These are things that constitute our daily 
lives, a protean driving force. They can be called infinite, for they appear to be inexhaustible 
and manifest differently in every phase of life. To many, the cardinal form of transcendence 
remains the God of their religion, to whom they relate. To others it is the interior space of the self, 
whose unfathomable depths they must plumb. This is done via a mystical ‘journey’ into the self, 
culminating in a transcendent experience, in which the self encounters God or astonishing ideas.2 
The contemporary reinterpretation of transcendence and self-transcendence evident in secular 
spirituality and aspects of the New Age movement has its antecedents in the transcendentalist 
1.Vattimo (2003:32) writes: ‘Nietzsche had already perceived that belief in God cannot be replaced by belief in an objective truth capable 
of disproving religion and setting us free from the errors and lies of the priests. This truth more true than the God of the priests would 
then be the true God, even more dangerous and unacceptable than the one of ecclesiastical tradition.’
2.Possible criticism of mystical experiences or the ‘inward journey’ is that it eliminates others (and even the self in some of its forms). 
Is religion possible without the O/other? Certainly ethics is not. Mystical practices are easily reduced to mere techniques to activate 
certain brain functions (AUB phenomena – Absolute Unitary Being – experienced as euphoric union with the All or the deity through 
deafferentation (elimination of sensory input) and other meditative techniques. 
Page 1 of 12
 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za doi:10.4102/hts.v67i3.944
and Romantic movements in mid-19th century America, in 
which Ralph Waldo Emerson was a leading figure. 
My thesis, in a nutshell, is as follows. Transcendence is 
innately human and manifests itself in desire, which is open 
and infinite. Christianity attributes transcendence exclusively 
to the ‘totally other’ dimension of God. It disregards the fact 
that the human mind is wired for transcendence. Humans – 
including their openness to the future (desire) – are reduced 
to sinfulness. The sole, remotely positive characterisation of 
humans is that they are created in God’s image – and that 
quality they have lost. In the Old Testament they await the 
Messiah to bring deliverance; in the New Testament they 
gain it purely in their attributed (Pauline) status of being ‘in 
Christ’. The closest it gets to acknowledging openness and 
desire, which is what I propose doing here, is the dictum: 
‘Become what you are.’ But even this dictum is hamstrung 
by the Christian ethos of that age. In our present context 
of immanent transcendence this fixated anthropology is 
incongruous. My basic premise, to be developed below, 
is that we are wired for desire in its open, infinite, futureoriented
dimension. Transcendence is integrally human; 
hence religion, imagination, inventiveness, fantasy and 
constant flux are permanent features of our history. Immanent 
transcendence is an anthropological datum. It is not confined 
to Europe and Western culture. Desire in the sense proposed 
here is common to all cultures: African, Eastern and Western 
alike.
I begin my argument by outlining the transcendental 
tradition that started with Emerson. I then examine human 
incompleteness between desire and the infinite with 
reference to the Greek legacy, before looking at Christianity’s 
relative disregard for desire and infinitude as essential to the 
human self, with specific reference to the biblical myth of the 
Fall and some responses to it. The next sections describe the 
infinitude of the self in relation to that of others and the role 
of affect as an essential corrective to religious and scientific 
rationalism, which allows little room for openness. Finally, 
I offer a critique of the infinite dimension of the self in a 
consumer culture. 
Emerson: Transcendence via the 
unconscious, affect, Eros and nature 
Emerson’s thinking is an essential background to understand 
the pertinence of immanent transcendence in our day and 
age. He was a forerunner of the accent on transcendence 
as part and parcel of the human self. He not only acted as 
a counterweight to the rationalism of his time, but paved 
the way for present-day secular spirituality. Emerson 
described his time (the mid-19th century) as bogged down 
in conventional traditions, dogmas and practices, partly as a 
result of the tyranny of rationalism (experienced at Harvard 
Divinity School where he studied and in the Unitarian 
Church where he ministered). The affective side of human 
nature was suppressed, so the people of his day were cut off 
from their emotional roots: 
The primary deficiency of the age was ... its inability to connect 
with the primal, erotic, instinctive, and intuitional element 
within, the affective side of humanity that connects us with 
divinity itself and also binds us to one another. 
(Gougeon 2007:4) 
Emerson’s transcendental philosophy3 propounded the 
dignity, rights and divinity of all human beings. It contributed 
greatly to the emancipation of slaves and the establishment 
of women’s rights. Today, human rights are the very core 
of social ethics. Emerson’s transcendental vision was one of 
personal harmony and primordial union with nature, God, 
the unconscious, affect and intuition. Alienation is the result 
of losing contact with our matrix. In the beginning the gods 
divided a solitary Human (Man) into many people, just as the 
hand ramifies into fingers in order to be more efficient. That 
lost unity can be regained. ‘For Emerson the source of this 
original unity is still with us. It is the power of Eros, the OverSoul,
the “divine Reason”’ (Gougeon 2007:6). Our overrated 
rationality needs to be complemented with all other aspects 
of existence to restore wholeness: 
The balanced unity of mind and body, conscious and 
unconscious, self and nature, is an essential element in reaching 
transcendence which, for them, was the firsthand experience of 
divinity. 
(Gougeon 2007:49) 
To Emerson’s mind we can overcome our dissatisfaction 
with overrated rationality4 by means of a transcendental 
descent into the depths of our nature, which brings 
fulfilment not attainable in a one-dimensionally rational5 
existence. In contrast to the Christianity of his day, which 
he considered oppressive, he did not seek fulfilment in a 
spiritualised reality. Instead of a transcendental encounter 
via Holy Scriptures or proclamation, or via a spiritualised 
‘beyond’ or ‘above’, he proposed a movement, via human 
corporeality, first inwards, then outwards (see Gill 1989). 
Human nature, or more specifically the unconscious, affect, 
intuition, eroticism, the imagination and experience, is the 
primary route to meaning, a sense of unity, authenticity and 
one’s ‘true’ self. Emerson contributed greatly to belief in the 
self and its powers, so typical of the New World and the 
great American Dream. Faith in yourself leads to discovery 
of the infinite, nature, Eros, the Over-Soul, the imagination, 
God within you. Only faith in yourself makes the difference 
that enables you to change the world around you. Hence the 
transcendent movement was prerequisite for changing the 
society of Emerson’s day: ‘sympathy, emotion, imagination, 
dream, and other life-sustaining functions of the unconscious, 
3.Prominent transcendentalists included Henry David Thoreau, Amos Bronson Alcott, 
Orestes Brownson, William Henry Channing, James Freeman Clarke, John Sullivan 
Dwight, Margaret Fuller, William Henry Furness, Frederick Henry Hedge, Theodore 
Parker and George Ripley. Emerson drew on the mysticism of Emanuel Swedenborg 
and on the German idealists. 
4.Reason and consciousness are seen as linked. ‘When consciousness dominates, 
one is faced with a society that has lost its capacity to feel and dream due to its 
repression of emotion and imagination and its desire to preserve an increasingly 
oppressive economic, social, political, and one might add military, status quo’ 
(Gougeon 2007:71–72).
5.Consciousness is regarded as the rational, masculine component, whereas nature 
and the unconscious, where nature manifests itself, represent the feminine, the 
source of affect and creativity. Emerson accentuates both aspects and, like Jung, 
discerns masculine and feminine aspects of the psyche (also see Gougeon 2007:72, 
115, 119). 
Page 2 of 12
 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za doi:10.4102/hts.v67i3.944
could provide the libido ballast to revitalize and redeem his 
society ...’ (Gougeon 2007:109).
Emerson laid the foundation for a mentality that, with 
growing affluence and technological advances, culminated 
in the present (mainly Western) self-image, which has 
made self-construction through technological artefacts a 
practical reality. Today there is renewed interest in a sense of 
holistic union with nature, a transcendental inward journey 
(meditative practices), a reappraisal of the corporeal and 
affective dimensions of life, an accent on imagination and 
inner creativity, and the like. 
Human incompleteness between 
desire and the infinite 
Transcendence is a mental movement, a thought process: it 
entails moving from familiar sameness to the new and the 
unknown; it represents mystery in the mode of strangeness 
and infinity. Human beings exist in this transcendent mode. 
Self-transcendence is a tautology because the self exists only 
in transcendent mode.6 Humans experience themselves as 
individuals, persons, subjects and see themselves as distinct 
from other people and things. That accounts for binary 
contrasts such as inner world and outside world, subject and 
object, self and other, consciousness and self-consciousness. 
The distinctions are not absolute, because the ‘autonomous 
self’ is in fact shaped by people and things outside itself.7 
Hence self-transcendence does not happen exclusively 
within the person, between the constructs of ‘I’ and ‘me’.8 
The way we engage continually in new interactions and see 
things differently changes our identity. As my insight into 
people and things changes – a constant ‘self-correction’ – I 
also change, for I am my insights and beliefs. Without the 
other self and self-transcendence make no sense.9 Emmanuel 
Levinas realised this and worked it out in his philosophy of 
‘the face of the other’, to which we return below. 
It would be reductive to regard descriptions and experiences 
of transcendence in a particular theological or religious 
phase of human culture as paradigmatic for our day and 
age. Transcendence manifests itself spontaneously in a form 
permitted by a particular culture and worldview. The specific 
manifestations of transcendence and self-transcendence vary 
from age to age, but their underlying biological constant is 
desire. 
6.In this context Nancy (2002:40) interprets Hegel as follows: ‘Thought must take 
the self out of itself; it must extract it from its simple being-in-itself: thought is 
itself such an extraction, along with the speech in which thinking takes itself out of 
itself and exposes itself’; and ‘Sense is therefore what makes itself sensed and what 
gives itself form in passage and as passage … it is incessant movement and activity’ 
(Nancy 2002:50). 
7.That determines every self-distinction, as Hegel affirms: ‘If A = A, it is because A 
posits itself as other than itself. Logos is subject, which means the exposing of the 
infinite exposing of identity’ (Nancy 2002:21). With reference to the I, he writes: 
‘The simple position of the I is an abstraction. On the contrary, the concrete 
awakening of the I is its awakening to the world and by the world – the world of 
alterity in general’ (Nancy 2002:60).
8.Interdependence with others is apparent in the distinction between I and me. ‘I’ is 
what I am in my own experience, ‘me’ is the way others identify me as myself (see 
Hankiss 2006:331. For more complex examples, see Ryle 1949:180–182). 
9.Hegel (see 1959:107, 112) puts it thus: ‘Every one is also the other of another and 
vice versa. If this mutual alienation is comprehended, Being negates its negation 
and thereby affirms itself as the one in the other. It then remains itself in all changes 
and transitions. This is true infinity of Being.’
Aristophanes’s myth about the origin of human nature 
in Plato’s dialogue Symposium (189c–190c) associates the 
experience of human incompleteness with our origin. In 
broad outline the picture is as follows.10 Originally we were 
very different from what we are today. We were ‘dual’ 
beings with two heads, four arms, four legs and round 
bodies that enabled us to roll on the ground at great speed. 
There were three ‘genders’: a dual female, a dual male, and 
a man-woman combination. This original state was superior 
to our present one – we were stronger in the sense of being 
more complete. By contrast our present situation represents 
a ‘fall’. The sole problem was human hubris. ‘We desired, 
in what may be called the pagan version of Original Sin, to 
overthrow the gods’ (Hyland 1995:113). To punish us Zeus 
split us into two beings, knotting the skin at the navel so 
when we look down it will remind us of our former glory 
and move us to humility. Of course, at the same time Zeus 
doubled the number of human beings, thus increasing the 
supply of offerings to the gods. The god Eros was also born 
to this divided fallen state. He has three ‘elements’. The 
‘ontological’ element is the imperfect, incomplete human 
condition. People are erotic but incomplete. The second 
element of Eros is recognition of the incompleteness, and the 
third the striving to surmount it by reverting to the original 
state of fulfilment (completeness). That explains our comical 
attempts to unite sexually with our other half: 
We take all those funny positions and get so passionately excited 
because we want to overcome our physical incompleteness and 
become whole again ... In principle, all the myriad ways in which 
we are incomplete, experience that incompleteness, and strive to 
overcome it, are manifestations of our erotic natures. 
(Hyland 1995:115)
Plato’s Symposium tells Socrates’s story of his experience with 
Diotima to explain the nature of love (Eros). Eros cannot be 
divine, because he is composed of opposing entities. His 
father, Poros, the God of plenty, was seduced by Penia 
(poverty). Because of his parentage he is alternately poor and 
rich, oscillating between affluence and penury, wisdom and 
folly. Here Eros symbolises desire, which always oscillates 
between fulfilment and unfulfilment. This is typical of human 
beings, who not only oscillate between want and abundance, 
but remain unsatisfied even in times of plenty and, like Eros, 
constantly strive for fulfilment, as evidenced by the history 
of eroticism in human life (see Du Toit 2010:65–67). Thus 
humans were destined for eroticism, for incompleteness from 
the outset, and they are aware of it. They are not responsible 
for their sense of incompleteness and unfulfilment, nor can 
they control it – it is a result of the ‘original sin’ of their 
ancestors. Secondly, they cannot but try to surmount their 
incompleteness; and thirdly, they are doomed to failure 
(Hyland 1995:118). Aristophanes sees the manifestations of 
Eros as polysemous: the creation of laws, artistic creativity, 
philosophy, all the noblest human aspirations. In this sense 
Eros also offers comfort (Hyland 1995:121, 123). 
Thus self-transcendence may be seen as erotically driven, for 
it suggests: 
10.Here I follow Hyland’s version (1995:111–137), which focuses on tragedy and 
comedy in philosophy.
Page 3 of 12
 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za doi:10.4102/hts.v67i3.944
that behind action lies dissatisfaction with what one has, desire to 
have something else; behind going lies not wanting to be here, 
wanting to be there. From the standpoint of the agent ‘there’ is 
better, ‘here’ is worse. 
(Barabas 1977:178)11 
Even though the driving force of self-transcendence is desire, 
we cannot conceive of life without it. Without desire the world 
is tedious. An example is Ulysses’s rejection of Calypso’s offer 
of immortality: he prefers the excitement of being human to 
the boring perfection of the gods. ‘Here deathlessness and 
agelessness don’t mean divinity but the never-endingness of 
hell’ (Barabas 1977:182). Voltaire’s Candide is equally bored 
in the perfect Eldorado, where nothing is lacking except the 
thrill of desire (Du Toit 2007:269).12
In the final analysis, the paradisiacal harmony described in 
myths of origin is as unending as desire.13 The Old Testament 
story of the Fall presupposes a paradisiacal state, but who 
really knows what that was? The notion of paradisiacal bliss, 
like the notion of infinity, can only be understood in terms of 
human experience of need and desire. Poros’s abundance is 
as infinite as Penia’s want. Perfect harmony in its infinitude 
is unknowable. Plato connects Eros with the idea of creation 
and, as Paul Riceour (1986:13) states, creation entails a dual 
infinitude: ‘All things emerge from nothingness and are 
borne toward the infinite’. The same applies to any science 
that grows from the nihil of genesis. This mixture of finitude 
and infinity, of fulfilment and unfulfilment characterises the 
development of thought from mythos to logos. Logos does 
not mean unadulterated, unequivocal truth. It is never free 
of myth. That is why it resorts to metaphors, models and 
analogies, all strategies indicating that we do not fully know. 
Sin reinterpreted in the foregoing way is crucial for our 
notion of transcendence as expounded here; it is vital if 
religion is to retain its allure. The next section probes this 
aspect, explaining why human beings must be viewed as 
open and unfulfilled. The situation is indeed one of non posse 
non peccare.
Christianity’s relative disregard of 
desire and infinitude as essential to 
the human self
The same elements of desire, separation, sin, an original state 
of harmony and nostalgia for it, and infinitude (immortality) 
feature in the Christian doctrine of the Fall. Desire underlies 
the fall. Eve finds the tree of knowledge of good and evil 
desirable (Gn 3:6). The result is separation (from paradise, 
God, eternal life, humans’ true self as the image of God). 
11.Nancy (2002:60) sees self-consciousness as desire: ‘Self-consciousness is essentially 
desire, because it is consciousness of self as and out of its consciousness of the other.’
12.The erotic drive, marked by separation, unfulfilment and infinitude, is obviously 
rooted in physical sexuality. But it would be reductive to limit it to that, since it is 
basic to the entire human psyche. The popular distinction between Eros and agape 
is misleading, because Eros is not devoid of agape, and vice versa. 
13.That is why myth is the apposite idiom for speaking about fulfilment and 
unfulfilment. If we shift from myth to logos, we get bogged down in the paradoxes 
that often characterise metaphysics. 
Martin Buber (1939:229) puts it aptly: ‘Through the Fall the 
unity of being and destiny, or of the “I” and the “Self” has been 
lost. Hence sinful man is forced continually to seek his Self 
or himself.’ Buber considers humans to be self-contradictory 
(the original title of his book was Der Mensch im Widerspruch). 
They rebel against God, against their divine destiny (Buber 
1939:169, 171). They cannot return to their perfect origin and 
each day brings a fresh fall. Human conflict is enacted in the 
stress-field between our human sinfulness and the image of 
God in us (Buber 1939:172, 174). Transcendence is intrinsic to 
humanness: 
Man contrasts the imperfect world of actual experience, as he 
knows it, with a perfect existence, a heightened, intensified, ideal 
existence, freed from the contingent and accidental, the sight of 
which gives him a satisfaction which is wholly different from 
that of the experience of any reality in this world as it is. 
(Buber 1939:175) 
That is the ‘infinite’ in human beings (given with 
consciousness) and that is why nature or finitude fails to 
satisfy us. ‘We long for simplicity, for that which is wholly 
natural. But is seems as though man, and man alone, were 
condemned never to find the simple and natural’ (Buber 
1939:183). Buber rejects recognition of the natural, biological 
dimensions of humanness as materialism, which he defines 
as follows: 
Essentially man is an animal, his instincts as well as his physicopsychical
organism are the same; the only difference is that 
through the special development of his brain and of the central 
nervous system the life-process gains new possibilities of 
differentiation. It is from such differentiation that ‘culture’ is to 
be understood, as superstructure – biologically necessary – of the 
vital functions. The spiritual element serves to regulate the life of 
this highly developed animal, and to keep its course as even as 
possible; owing to the special character of this animal, it needs 
these special measures to protect it. 
(Buber 1939:189) 
In Buber’s view the Platonic myth of the Fall is caused by our 
sensory nature. He repudiates the notion that human conflict 
is the result of that nature rather than of the human spirit: 
The spirit is victim of the delusion of the senses. Thus this view 
is not dealing with an actual contradiction, defiance, rebellion of 
man against the Creator, but with an unfortunate combination of 
the elements of which human nature is composed. 
(Buber 1939:193)
In this, Buber (1939:198) acknowledges that humans are Eros, 
which he associates with reason and spirit, but traces it all to 
the classic conception of the Fall. 
Here Hegel’s argument remains the most plausible, because 
unlike Buber (and most theologians of his time), he does 
not denigrate natural explanations. Hegel (1985:92ff) deals 
with the Fall under the heading of ‘”Alienation”: Natural 
humanity’. He accommodates human biological nature in the 
functioning of the human spirit (mind). Human nature is not 
evil in itself – that would be a Manichaean dualism: 
Rather it is when human being constitutes its existence, 
establishes the criteria for its life, according to the immediacy, 
particularity, and externality of the physical nature it shares with 
all created things, that ‘cleavage’ occurs and evil arises. 
(Hegel 1985:92, n.90)
Page 4 of 12
 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za doi:10.4102/hts.v67i3.944
The notion of the Fall and sin is a consequence of human 
nature as possibility (‘original state’) and the movement 
to immediate circumstances, of human self-consciousness 
which is not what it should be (Hegel 1985:95–96). We have 
the potential (for development, insight, understanding) 
but Spirit has not yet developed sufficiently to realise 
that potential fully. The notion of an original state is the 
representation of humans as the image of God (Hegel 
1985:96). Philosophically it is: 
a condition of the highest spiritual perfection, of a human being 
in unity with nature, hence as an untroubled intelligence, which 
does not turn away from nature into itself by means of reflection, 
an intelligence that penetrates nature as its spiritual centre, yet 
not by standing over against it or separating from it, but as an 
intelligence that exists as a pure and highest knowledge. 
(Hegel 1985:97) 
This primal state is based on affect, instinct and intuition and 
is not yet governed by reason (Hegel 1985:98). It is thought 
that gives rise to the host of ideas and thus to the multiplicity 
and separation with which we live. 
Evil, then, has to do with our contingent circumstances (with 
the accent on individual aspects such as personal need, 
want, desire) and what emerges from our mental processes 
(cognition, representation, volition): 
Both good and evil are before the human being; it has a choice 
between them, and its will is evil. Hence evil is its fault [Schuld]. 
This evil is self-seeking: its goals relate only to its singularity 
insofar as it is opposed to the universal, i.e. insofar as it is natural 
... In a purely abstract natural condition, humanity is neither 
good nor evil; this means however, that it is not yet actually 
human ... Thus evil, the will of self-seeking, exists only through 
consciousness and cognition, and constitutes the first form of 
will. 
(Hegel 1985:102–103) 
Hegel uses this background to put the biblical Fall in a new 
perspective. He points out the contradictions in the story. 
Humans are forbidden to eat the fruit of the tree of knowledge 
of good and evil, yet this knowledge is what distinguishes the 
human mind from that of animals. The snake promises that 
eating this fruit will make humans like God (sicut Deus), yet 
even before they tasted the fruit God had said that they ‘had 
become like one of us’ (Gn 3:22). God himself acknowledges 
that the divine in human nature is a product of knowledge 
(both generally and knowledge of good and evil) (Hegel 
1985:104–105). Hegel links this with his basic model: 
For the speculative content is precisely the comprehension of the 
concept of the thing – which involves the concept’s development 
– and hence the comprehension of the inner antithesis that the 
concept contains and through which it moves. 
(Hegel 1985:105)
Thought is not possible without a negative, a contrast, 
and myths of origin are no exception. That is why they are 
always marked by separation, opposition and the infinite. 
The question of good and evil is unavoidably part of our 
thinking and any contradictions must be resolved by that 
same rationality. Thought both wounds and heals itself! ‘[It] 
is not that it [sin, evil] ought not to occur: it has occurred 
because human being is consciousness’ (Hegel 1985:106). 
Humans are banished from paradise because of knowledge 
(leaving animals better off!). Originally they were immortal, 
so why eat the fruit to gain immortality? But the myth is 
meant to explain mortality as a result of human finitude 
(Hegel 1985:107). Hence the human mind comprehends the 
idea of finitude and infinity, of divinity and humanity as part 
of its substance: 
This infinite possibility is its subjectivity. In this consciousness 
humanity knows the divine idea, the universal, and knows itself 
to be determined for the universal, i.e. elevated above all locality, 
nationality, condition, life-situation etc.
(Hegel 1985:109)
If we apply this to encounter with God, the radically 
transcendent, we cannot bypass ordinary thought processes. 
Revelation does not present a Deus nudus but a mental 
turning point.14 By the same token, the search for a ‘true’ 
self via self-transcendence can be experienced as intensely 
meaningful. The act of self-transcendence is our attempt to 
understand ourselves at a given moment by seeing ourselves 
‘in terms of…’, ‘in relation to…’ or ‘as responding to…’ – but 
also by experiencing ourselves as ‘more than…’15 ‘The I is 
not a being that always remains the same, but is the being 
whose existing consists in identifying itself, in recovering 
its identity throughout all that happens to it’ (Levinas 
1979:36). The self, like God, is infinite and all other aspects 
of self-experience are part of our mental processes. We speak 
about the self emerging in language, ideas and experience 
without abolishing its ‘alterity’ (otherness). Through selftranscendence
I attain enlightenment and understanding 
without fully ‘clarifying’ myself.16 The finite cannot know 
the infinite, yet we ‘know’ ourselves and believers intuitively 
‘know’ God. Desire is insatiable, but that does not prevent 
ongoing interaction with the object of desire. It is a possible 
impossibility, a transcendent experience, a paradox of 
consciousness, a perpetual self evaluation. The nature of the 
human mind and its concomitant thought processes (which 
entail concepts like infinity, unknowability of the Ding an 
sich) cannot but impose a perennial character on the sciences, 
from philosophy, epistemology and psychology to physics.17 
The Kantian transcendental subject, via transcendental 
imagination, produces syntheses and mental constructs 
14.One cannot reflect on God without reflecting on humans as transcending and selftranscending
beings. Dupré (1976:viii) writes: ‘The word “God” appears on every 
page of Western philosophy. Yet rarely do we find mentioned the inner space 
out of which the idea of God grew and developed. Instead we encounter mostly 
descriptions of an ultimate reality, opposed to the self’s being and separated 
from it in a “supernatural” realm of its own.’ One reason for this is probably the 
tradition of objectivity that dates back to the ancient Greeks. Dupré (1976:33–34) 
mentions that the notion of self first emerged in Hellenistic and Roman times 
when the bonds between the individual and society were loosening – a process 
completed by Christianity. ‘Thus transcendence came to occupy the very centre 
of self-awareness.’ 
15.With reference to the relevant authors Hankiss (2006:204–205) lists 41 definitions 
of self. The many examples (only well-known authors are mentioned) include: the 
self as noumenal or phenomenal, transparent, Faustian, implicit, schizophrenic 
post-self, self-deceptive (Rorty), extended, created (Weber), creative (Maslow), 
embodied (Kristeva), disenchanted, symbolic, normative, problematic, changeable, 
minimal, marginal, evolving, transcendent, pre-linguistic, semiotic, and so forth. 
16.Here I follow the distinction made by Caputo and Vattimo (2007:81–82) between 
world and event: ‘Thus instead of opposing two worlds, or of opposing God and 
the world as if these were two realms of being, I distinguish between the world and 
the event by which the world is disturbed, the unconditional claim that solicits the 
world from within, that interrupts and summons it, which I think deconstruction 
is (if it is).’
17.For the phenomenon that knowledge is increasingly regarded as mystery, see Du 
Toit (2007:155–156). 
Page 5 of 12
 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za doi:10.4102/hts.v67i3.944
that are not empirically observable. We experience these as 
consciousness of knowledge. But ‘synthesis’ comes at a price: 
‘As soon as reflection comes on the scene it sunders man, for 
reflection is essentially dividing, sundering’ (Ricoeur 1986:19, 
1992:339). The synthesis seeks to connect my inner mental 
world with the outside world; hence, rationality is marked 
by the same separation as Aristophanes’s myth of origin. 
The diverse rational models are no less comical than the 
postures Aristophanes ascribes to our attempts at achieving 
perfect union. The separation between subject and object, 
self and other occurs via human corporeality in the mode of 
receptiveness. Openness to the outside world is prerequisite 
for knowing anything and any knowledge I have is always 
from my particular perspective: ‘Primal finitude consists in 
perspective or point of view. It affects my primary relation to the 
world, which is to “receive” objects and not to create them’ 
(Ricoeur 1986:24). Perspective is simply the angle from which 
I observe things. Our finitude is determined by our slant on 
reality. There are many possible perspectives, of which mine 
is but one. No person or agency can accommodate all possible 
points of view. My outlook is always finite. The totality of 
possible perspectives is endless, for there can always be 
new ones. Our finitude is also emphasised by the fact that 
we cannot fully express our meaning in language. Moving 
from myth to logos does not imply that logos represents 
ultimate or authentic truth. Thus Ricoeur (1986:30), referring 
to Hegel, writes: ‘We do not actually and absolutely say 
what in this sense-certainty we really mean.’ Reason is 
doomed to perpetual transcendence. To Ricoeur (1986:43) 
the distinction between sensory experience of things that 
manifest themselves and an attempt to grasp and articulate 
them intellectually is not solved by a philosophy of finitude, 
even of self-transcending finitude. It needs a synthesis that 
links finitude with rationality (including universality and 
infinity): 
If man is a mean between being and nothingness, it is primarily 
because he brings about ‘mediations’ in things; his intermediate 
place is primarily his function as a mediator of the infinite and 
the finite in things. 
(Ricoeur 1986:46) 
It is via transcendental imagination (the third term) that 
humans are able to link understanding and sensibility 
(Ricoeur 1986:73). Transcendental imagination is the hidden 
synthesis that constitutes the form (understanding) of things 
(Ricoeur 1986:79ff). 
Desire, distance, infinity and the 
other 
This section highlights the positive aspect of desire and 
infinitude. The force driving me towards the future can 
obviously be either negative or positive, but it is certainly not 
exclusively negative as Christianity would have it. I also look 
critically at rationalism and unitary (totalitarian) thinking, 
which leaves no scope for transcendence. At best it separates 
transcendence dualistically from rational immanent reality. 
I also focus on Levinas’s location (Platz) of transcendence in 
the face of the other, which inevitably introduces an ethical 
dimension. Unfortunately he fails to point out that seeing 
transcendence in the face of the other cannot be taken for 
granted, any more than the experience of transcendence 
within the self or in events around us.
In the foregoing model, desire, separation and the infinite 
are metaphysically interconnected; hence, the ‘object’ that 
arouses my desire is necessarily marked by infinitude. 
Levinas (1979:50, 62) sees desire as ‘the Desire for the Infinite 
which the desirable arouses rather than satisfies’. To him the 
difference between desire and need is that desire is aroused 
by the other (her face), whereas need centres in the subject 
(Levinas 1979:62). We can satisfy a need, but not a desire. 
His view of desire is positive. It is insatiable for the very 
reason that it is not a matter of need satisfaction but of the 
infinite, the other: ‘Immortality is not the objective of the 
first movement of Desire, but the other, the Stranger. It is 
absolutely nonegoist; its name is justice’ (Levinas 1979:63). 
To Levinas (1979) the hallmark of metaphysical unitary 
thought is that separation is unacceptable and must be seen 
as a fall, privation or temporary rupture of unity – separation 
is regarded as need: 
Need indicates void and lack in the needy one, its dependence 
on the exterior, the insufficiency of the needy being precisely in 
that it does not entirely possess its being and consequently is not 
strictly speaking separate. 
(Levinas 1979:102)
What makes Levinas’s work remarkable is his criticism of the 
Western ontology of power and his replacement of egocentric 
substantialist thought with the dependence of relationality 
(relationship with the other). This is achieved by shifting the 
emphasis from totality (unity) to infinity (separation), which 
makes everyone dependent on infinite desire for the other; 
hence enabling them to elude the stranglehold of knowledge. 
Thought is governed by finitude and infinity.18 To Levinas 
infinity19 is inherent in humanness: it is what inheres in 
my self ‘as a positing in me’. ‘The distance between me 
and God, radical and necessary, is produced in being 
itself’ (Levinas 1979:26, 48). Levinas is opposed to Western 
unitary thought20 and replaces unity or totality with infinity, 
as reflected in the title of his Totality and infinity. Infinity 
manifests itself in alterity, which human beings desire: ‘It is 
understood as the alterity of the Other and of the Most-High’ 
(Levinas 1979:34). He refers to a transcendent metaphysical 
movement, ‘and transcendence, like desire and inadequatio, is 
necessarily a transascendence (Levinas 1979:35). The notion 
of an ascending movement has to do with the infinite that 
manifests itself in me and makes me move beyond myself 
18.This idea derives from Hegel: ‘How spirit is the finite that finds itself to be infinite 
in the exposition of its finitude, this is what is to be thought – which is to say, this 
is what it is to “think”’ (Nancy 2002:31). Hegel (1959:89) links infinity and finitude: 
‘Thus the failure of all rational theology is clear: It is unable to see that a dialectical 
negation is also an affirmative relation. If infinity is thought by itself, apart from 
the finitude of the existing world, then infinity itself becomes something finite; it is 
limited by the otherness of the world.’
19.We do not know what infinity means. The concept modifies our experience of 
finitude. That does not mean we can do without it, any more than we can do 
without ‘nothingness’ (non-being) and negativity, which serve mainly as catalysts 
of thought. 
20.Unitary thinking as a metaphysical motive extends from Parmenides and Plotinus 
to Spinoza and Hegel. To Levinas (1979:102) the gist of it was that ‘separation and 
interiority were held to be incomprehensible and irrational. The metaphysical 
knowledge which puts the same in touch with the other then would reflect this 
falleness. Metaphysics would endeavor to suppress separation, to unite’. 
Page 6 of 12
 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za doi:10.4102/hts.v67i3.944
towards the other. This movement towards the other is not 
like a mental movement when I approach some object. The 
other is not an object. That is why Levinas (1979:49) makes a 
clear distinction between transcendence and objectivity and 
criticises Western ontological thought, which he regards as 
a philosophy of power that dominates the other (Levinas 
1979:45–46).21
Although human finitude may be experienced negatively, 
Levinas does not see the experience of finitude and negativity 
as the driving force behind human transcendence. ‘The idea 
of the perfect and of infinity is not reducible to the negation 
of the imperfect; negativity is incapable of transcendence’ 
(Levinas 1979:41). The notion of infinitude includes 
separation, symbolised by distance. Infinity always lies ahead 
of me; I do not coincide with it, which implies separation of 
finite humans from infinity. We find that separation within 
ourselves, in our unconscious, creating distance between me 
and my self,22 but also between me and others.23 Separation 
is a product of thought. Infinity is inconceivable if I do not 
exist separately from others (Levinas 1979:54, 79). Because 
humans are separated from others outside themselves they 
can elevate themselves to an absolute point of reference. 
Levinas (1979) sees absolute separation as nonrelationship, 
introversion into the self and hence atheism: 
One can call atheism this separation so complete that the 
separated being maintains itself in existence all by itself, without 
participating in the Being from which it is separated ... The 
soul, the dimension of the psychic, being an accomplishment of 
separation, is naturally atheist. By atheism we thus understand 
a position prior to both the negation and the affirmation of the 
divine, the breaking with participation by which the I posits 
itself as the same and I.
(Levinas 1979:58)
That is symbolised by desire. Whereas desire is occupied 
with the other, the search for happiness is occupied with self. 
That is why he compares happiness with politics (the search 
for power) and desire with religion, for:
religion is Desire and not struggle for recognition. It is the 
surplus possible in a society of equals, that of glorious humility, 
responsibility, and sacrifice, which are the condition for equality 
itself. 
(Levinas 1979:64) 
Normally we are unaware of our own transcendent 
orientation and the transcendent (unknown) dimension 
in other people, things and events is overlooked and 
disregarded, because we reduce them to our fixed ideas.24 We 
21.This includes the ‘objectivity’ of self-knowledge: ‘The subject is “for itself” – it 
represents itself and knows itself as long as it is. But in knowing or representing 
itself it possesses itself, dominates itself, extends its identity to what … itself comes 
to refute this identity’ (Levinas 1979:87). 
22.Ward (2007:123) puts it thus: ‘Perhaps the closest we get to distance as such 
is the identification of difference. This distance is implicated then in a common 
participation, a common recognition of exteriority: I am not the other; the other 
is not I; the other is not reducible to or measurable by me; and I am not reducible 
to or measurable by the other. What is intimated in this distance is an excess; the 
mystery of alterity. Every representation made in this distance must fail if the aim 
of such representation is to define.’
23.Frandsen (2007:115) formulates the same idea thus: ‘We can see it in the way that 
man, in the very moment he discovers his “interior” as something originary, and 
so takes himself into possession, also and at the same time discovers that this “the 
most proper” in advance is in relation to some “other” or to some “exterior”, to a 
transcendence that qualifies the “internal man”.’
24.The reductive process that confines the infinite other to race, gender, identity, et 
cetera usually manifests as binary thought (see Du Toit 2004a:442–459).
ascribe identity, characteristics and attributes to people and 
gods to give us control over them. We want to know whom 
we are dealing with and what to expect from them. We want 
to secure ourselves. We want rules to regulate our interaction 
with people and things. They are necessary for a structured 
society, so we pin people down to perceptions. To facilitate 
the process we classify them according to race, gender, class, 
culture, literacy, characteristics, and the like. For ourselves 
we claim the luxury of ‘openness’, self-transcendence, the 
desire to realise some ideal without being pinned down 
to particular words or actions. But encountering the other 
in her infinitude makes this impossible: ‘The face resists 
possession, resists my powers. In its epiphany, expression, 
the sensible, still graspable, turns into total resistance to the 
grasp’ (Levinas 1979:197). 
Hearing the divine word is not the same as knowing it as 
an object. It is more like opening up to something different, 
achieving an encounter, initiating events. Levinas hears 
God’s voice in encounter with the other: 
The dimension of the divine opens forth from the human face. A 
relation with the Transcendent free from all captivation by the 
Transcendent is a social relation. It is here that the Transcendent, 
infinitely other, solicits us and appeals to us. The proximity of the 
Other, the proximity of the neighbor, is in being an ineluctable 
moment of the revelation of an absolute presence. 
(Levinas 1979:77–78) 
Not that God is incarnated in the other, ‘but precisely by 
his face, in which he is disincarnate, is the manifestation of 
the height [read infinity] in which God is revealed’ (Levinas 
1979:79). And: ‘If I can no longer have power over him it is 
because he overflows absolutely every idea I can have of him’ 
(Levinas 1979:87). 
The other’s infinitude makes relationship possible (Levinas 
1979:196). The face and the affects it expresses are always 
complemented by appropriate dialogue25: 
The idea of infinity is produced in the opposition of conversation,26 
in sociality. The relation with the face, with the other absolutely 
other which I cannot contain, the other in this sense infinite, is 
nonetheless my Idea, a commerce ... the face speaks to me and 
thereby invites me to a relation incommensurable with a power 
exercised, be it enjoyment or knowledge. 
(Levinas 1979:197, 198)
The other enhances my freedom, for instance by evoking 
my goodness: ‘The face opens the primordial discourse 
whose first word is obligation, which no ‘interiority’ permits 
avoiding.’ It is the infinitude of the other which generates 
ethics (Levinas 1979:201, 204). 
Desire is tied up with the other. It also includes the other’s 
desire.27 My self does not coincide with the self of the other. It 
25.Levinas does not elaborate on this. Today we know that the so-called mirror 
neurons evoke emotions that we perceive in us as well. Emotion evokes emotion 
in a widening spiral. Only rational intervention can temper unbridled emotion. But 
affect and reason (discourse) should complement each other. That is the weakness 
of over-emotional sermons that usually lack substance. Conversely, overly rational 
sermons that do not address us emotionally are no more than lectures. 
26.Levinas (1979:206) refers to the ‘primordial face to face of language’.
27.‘The I, in conflict with its immediate practical existence (Dasein), is both individual 
and social. Every practical self is in the same situation, recognizing in the other the 
same problem which is in itself. The object of desire thus changes and becomes 
another I. Each I wants to be one with and recognized by another I; concurrently, 
each I remains an independent individual, an alien object for the other’ (Hegel 
1959:215).
Page 7 of 12
 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za doi:10.4102/hts.v67i3.944
is desire that the other will recognise me as the desire I am, as 
the infinite self-becoming that I am (Nancy 2002:62). The self 
is desire. Nancy (2002) describes it thus: 
Desire is the necessity of consciousness: it is the necessity that the 
unity of consciousness come and become for consciousness itself. 
Desire is therefore less the tension of lack, and the projection of 
a satisfaction that would annul it, than it is the tension of the 
coming of the other as the becoming of the self ... Desire is neither 
aspiration nor demand, nor is it lust or voracity. It demands 
nothing but the other, and is satisfied with nothing other: but the 
other as such, the veritable other of the self, is not an object one 
could demand, an object with which one could take satisfaction. 
(Nancy 2002:61)
The ‘self’ in self-transcendence
Augustine, pioneer researcher of the inner world of human 
thought and conscience, distinguishes between se cogitare (to 
think about oneself) and se nosse (to know oneself) (Dalferth 
2007:45). Knowing oneself is knowledge of ‘movements’ of the 
self rather than of a fixed core. The pursuit of self-knowledge 
often leads to self-conflict. Levinas (1979:37) puts it thus: 
‘The I that repels the self, lived as repugnance, the I riveted 
to itself, lived as ennui, are modes of self-consciousness and 
rest on the unrendable identity of I and the self.’ Hence I am 
a stranger, an other to myself (see Levinas 1979:39). 
What is the mental world of the divided subject like? It is 
characterised by the unknown (transcendent) nature of the 
other and oneself. It is, in effect, the dimension of infinity 
that we attribute to self-knowledge and knowledge of the 
other. Because we can never know completely, the process 
of knowing is itself a never ending, ever unaccomplished 
labour. To the extent that it is successful, my self-knowledge 
does not imply transparent self-knowledge on the part of the 
other to whom I am relating. But neither am I transparent 
to myself and the ego I ‘actually’ am remains an enigma 
to me.28 There simply is no single ‘core’ I or transcendent I 
behind my thinking, language and behaviour, who rules the 
dream world of the unconscious like a demiurge and then 
surfaces at the conscious level.29 To understand myself in my 
self-transcendent mode I have to realise that I am never fully 
accessible to myself (Dalferth 2007:46, 48). 
The concept of a transcendent self refers to the mysterious, 
even unfathomable and inexplicable aspects of self. It refers 
to the enigma of the unconscious, the unknown, Lacan’s objêt 
petit a,30 the transcendental imagination that is only known 
28.I am simply not aware which experiences from the past influence my current 
perceptions (especially my emotions). Hegel (1959:203–204) describes it thus: 
‘The soul is in tension: On the one hand, it is a subjective centre for itself and, on 
the other hand, it remains tied to a vast subconscious substantial life. I am a simple, 
bottomless pit sunk into an infinite abundance of possible or virtual experiences. 
The individual never knows how many experiences have been experienced and 
absorbed by him or how many he has forgotten ... As a unique subjective centre of 
all its functions, the soul is a monad: It carves out of its experience the totality of a 
particular world-view in which it mirrors itself.’
29.This does not mean that we cannot assume various ‘roles’: ‘Theatres will never be 
able to compete with the wealth of roles played by people in their everyday lives’ 
(Hankiss 2006:313, n.34).
30.Žižek (2006:67) defines Lacan’s concept of objêt petit a as both the object and 
the cause of desire. The cause of desire always exceeds its object: ‘[No] matter 
how close I get to the object of desire, its cause remains at a distance, elusive”’ 
(Žižek 2006:77). Applied to desire it means that I desire the other’s desire, so desire 
itself becomes an indeterminate drive (Žižek 2006:42). Hence desire can be seen as 
perpetually transcendent. That is why Freud’s work is equally dualistic: on the one 
hand cognisance of our physical apparatus, on the other the hermeneutics of the 
ever elusive unconscious, attempts to interpret dreams, the phenomenon of slips 
of the tongue (Žižek 2006:77–78). 
when it happens, desire that always exceeds the desire for 
demonstrable objects, one’s alter ego, the unexpected voice 
of conscience, et cetera. Neither does the transcendent I have 
an ‘identity’, for then it can be known, be pinned down. 
The transcendent I manifests itself (an epiphenomenon like 
consciousness) in what happens. 
The same applies to the question of which self is transcended 
in self-transcendence. After all, the self is not a fixed entity that 
remains the same (idem). In the mode of self-transcendence, 
self (ipse) does not coincide with the self that I or others 
construe. Hence it is not self in the idem sense of the word.31 
If I as a self is characterised by transcendence, we can assume 
that the other selves (my Gegenüber) that make up my world 
are similarly structured. The other’s transcendent nature 
makes knowledge of the other no less complicated than selfknowledge.
It is primarily the way the O/other features in 
our consciousness that creates awareness of transcendence, 
because my self never coincides with hers (Ryle 1949:16–17).
But clarifying the self does not necessarily affect our 
experience of ourselves. For example, we do not experience 
ourselves differently after studying brain scientists’ 
explanation of self-experience.32 One may surmise that 
advances in the cognitive and brain sciences will afford 
greater insight into the biologically structured background to 
humans as ‘open’, hence self-transcending beings. But even 
such insight into our biological functioning, especially that 
of consciousness, does not alter the fact that we cannot live 
outside our bodies, our consciousness or our brain structures. 
That is because thought always rises above physicality, even 
though it is wholly dependent on it. My thoughts emerge 
from the diverse operations of my brain, yet what I think is 
not determined by the physicality of my brain but is, at most, 
made possible by it. That has to do with the distinction between 
the brain and the mind, an epiphenomenon of brain, which 
is completely dependent on it but at the same time ‘exceeds’ 
it. I am my own understanding (Dalferth 2007:48). ‘Being 
reasonable is trying to overcome our first-person perspective 
by being neutral, not partial, and open-minded. Reason must 
govern reflection, and reflection overcomes first-person 
perspectives’ (Dalferth 2007:49). 
The human self is never neutral but is always preoccupied. 
As a rule, the self is seen in terms of a relation to some 
ideal, problem, need or lack and one’s identity at a given 
moment is determined by that interaction. But our selfconsciousness
‘integrates’ all aspects of existence and thus 
31.This is set forth mainly in Ricoeur’s Oneself as another (1992:115ff).
32.Self-consciousness is not exclusively biologically determined, otherwise we would 
still think exactly as our ancestors did. Our brain processes are no different from 
those of Cro-Magnon man, but we do not think the same or experience ourselves 
and our world in the same way. That is because our biology is only part of the story 
and the interpretive ‘how it works’ of the brain sciences tells us nothing about the 
what and the why of present-day brain contents or about experiences and ways of 
expressing self-transcendence. An example is human emotions: ‘The emotions of 
human beings the world over are as innate and as constitutive and as regular as 
our bone structure, and ... this is manifested in the universality of ways in which we 
express them’ (Walton 2004:xiii). But the things that people find shameful, what 
they fear and what makes them happy varies from one culture, era and person to 
the next. 
Page 8 of 12
 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za doi:10.4102/hts.v67i3.944
effects a holistic, ‘unified’ sense of self.33 That sense of unity 
creates the impression of an ‘isolated’ core identity, in terms 
of which contingently changing self-perceptions should be 
interpreted. The self is an ongoing construction determined 
by our contingent being-in-the-world (Dasein). At a given 
moment, we do not have an array of diverse self-experiences 
before us, like childhood photographs that we can compare 
to determine differences and similarities. We only remember 
highlights and mentally associate changes of identity with 
these. 
Hence self-transcendence does not entail a complete 
blueprint, a self approaching the outside world as a fixed 
identity. Self-perceptions are always from a particular 
perspective. So what the ‘self’ in self-transcendence actually 
consists of complicates the issue.34 It is not immutable, exactly 
defined or fixed.35 The ‘self’ that is transcended is, at most, a 
particular facet of our self-experience at a given moment.36 
Humans are designs-in-process to the day of their death. 
Human identity is continually changing, because it emerges 
every day in a particular challenging context in a unique 
manner. Self-transcendence merely reflects our intentional 
structure: we are schemers, forever moving from some 
state of incompleteness or unfulfilment towards change and 
a remedy for that state – be it physical (illness, poverty), 
epistemological (ignorance, error), social (poor human 
relations), political (oppression, unfreedom), religious (sin), 
ethical (absence of goodness) or psychological (some kind of 
‘pathology’). It is expressed by the narrative self.37
The focus on the interior world, like metaphysical ontotheology,
is biased. One has to link the quest for the 
transcendentally mysterious interior world with the reality of 
33.Poststructuralists have criticised philosophies of consciousness or the subject 
along with structuralism for introducing a new dualism: ‘Structuralism operates, 
as we have seen, on the basis of qualitative phenomenological oppositions and 
dichotomies such as small/large, male/female, odd/even, appearance/reality, 
false/true, and philosophies-of-the-subject on the basis of differentiations 
between subject/object, scheme/content, intention/reference and so on’ (see 
Janz 2004:34). The question is whether it centres on the integrity of human 
subjectivity or is striving for some totality and unity. I assume that the same 
physically determined human brain permits the epiphenomenon of thought, 
which throughout all distinctions and self-definitions that occur remains a single 
movement that inevitably discriminates between various schemes, some of which 
may appear to be dualistic. 
34.The self can be explained from the perspective of language, rationality, existence, 
the unconscious (psychoanalysis), human biology (brain sciences). The framework 
in which human identity and self-understanding is viewed is usually reductive, 
because no single aspect of human nature in isolation can explain all other facets. 
35.By the same token, the ancient Greek maxim, ‘know yourself’, is not a programme 
of self-knowledge and self-improvement, but expresses a belief that an unscrutinised
life is not worth living. 
36.I do not dwell on Foucault’s notion that the self is a construction, nor on the Buddhist 
concept of the illusory self (see Du Toit 2004b:1–45). Some structuralists also deny 
the existence of an autonomous human self and regard it as a conglomerate of 
structures. Others (e.g. Nikolas Rose) see the language of a particular historical 
era as a confined space (prison), in which any configuration of the self is possible. 
Hankiss (2006:92–93, 95) points out the role of consumer society and advertising 
in constructing the present-day self. 
37.The story we tell about ourselves (narrative self) is constructed by the imagination 
that transforms diversity into identity (Ricoeur 1992:127). It is our conception 
of our ‘character’ which compels us to see identity as sameness (idem) (Ricoeur 
1992:128). The narrative self is determined by the way we link self and events 
(Ricoeur 1992:142). Ricoeur (1992:159ff) applies the strategies of a novel to the 
narrative self. Regarding the relation between author, narrator and characters, he 
maintains that in my own story I am the narrator and the characters, but regard 
myself at most as co-author, because other influences in the story also play a role. 
For us the function of imagination in self-construction is important: ‘It is precisely 
because of the elusive character of real life that we need the help of fiction to 
organize life retrospectively, after the fact, prepared to take as provisional and 
open to revision any figure of employment borrowed from fiction or from history’ 
(Ricoeur 1992:162). 
the outside world.38 However unique or enigmatic the inner 
world, it can never be divorced from the external world. Selfunderstanding
is not a purely private business but a public 
enterprise. Consciousness itself is densely populated by 
the actors and plots that make up the theatre of the mind. 
Although contingent reality is forever changing, it remains 
my frame of reference for every self-evaluation. 
Role of affectivity in objectivity 
The subject enters the outside world (with intentionality, will 
and desire), but also receives it (as a gift, an appeal, enigma 
and challenge). The way we perceive the outside world 
depends on the mental lens we are using at that point in 
time. The lens diminishes our expectation and intention. But 
reality rarely fits into the lens and we are constantly forcing 
new focuses into our field of vision. If double vision sets in 
or our view is out of focus, conflict arises, which assumes 
diverse forms. It is given with desire as an existential mode, 
in which fulfilment continues to elude us. 
Naturally, affectivity accompanies every relation with 
the outside world. ‘Affectivity, an intrinsic dimension of 
embodiment, is itself intimately linked to a primordial interest, 
orientation or motivation, animating movement, perception 
and thought. Affectivity always permeates the cognitive 
stance’ (Parnas 2007:62–63). Affectivity is a neglected aspect 
of all epistemologies in our rational, modernistically oriented 
society. That is because our epistemological models focus 
on what can be rationally articulated. At most, affectivity 
features passively in the framework of logical, rational 
propositions. Rationality is marked by control; when we 
rationalise something we are in control. But we do not 
control our emotions – they control us. Emotions are not 
consciousness, but they inform consciousness. In that sense 
human affect, like consciousness, has an infinite dimension. 
Desire evokes affects (jealousy, contempt, happiness, 
unhappiness). Fear, especially in the form of anxiety, has to 
do with the unknown. Longing and nostalgia presuppose 
distance and separation. Our experience of transcendence 
may be marked by emotions like surprise, fear, guilt feelings 
and the like. 
Consciousness is always co-determined by emotion, 
although as a rule it is ‘neutral’. I cannot decide what mood 
I want to be in and then it happens. Emotion is the stepchild 
of the public, rational self. It is the embarrassment of our 
corporeality, our biology. Yet is emotion not where we are 
closest to our bodies? That is why we usually confine it to our 
private space and do not admit it to the daylight of reason. 
Emotion is the embarrassing fear, jealousy, contempt, pride, 
admiration, nostalgia informing our rational perspective. 
It is also the dark area where desire, imagination, intuition 
and creativity lurk – without which no innovative thought 
38.Wider (1977:152) cites Edelman’s theory of different neural and cognitive maps 
that determine how the external and interior worlds feature in the mind. This 
means that input from both self and the world are necessary for consciousness. He 
distinguishes between primary consciousness underlying a higher consciousness. 
It is not personal and does not require language. Here self refers to automatic 
processes that are necessary for individual self-preservation. It calls for both 
present and past perceptual categories of self (Wider 1977:140).
Page 9 of 12
 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za doi:10.4102/hts.v67i3.944
is possible. To us, it is the often irrational and embarrassing 
limbic system, which nourishes the ‘disembodied’ sphere of 
the rational, thinking self that is ‘isolated’ from us. 
Affectivity determines every epistemology as well as all 
self-understanding.39 In a sense, epistemological inquiry 
into knowledge, the role of transcendental reflection in 
knowledge, the relation of subject to object and the like 
remain formal and abstract. It does not involve affectivity, 
practicality (ethos) and the axiological aspect of human 
knowledge. Feeling and knowing are interdependent. 
‘Knowing ... exteriorizes and poses its object in being, sets 
up a fundamental cleavage between the object and the 
subject. It “detaches” the object or “opposes it” to the I’ 
(Ricoeur 1986:85). Whereas knowing establishes the duality 
of subject and object, feeling overcomes it. ‘Feeling is ... 
the manifestation of a relation to the world that constantly 
restores our complicity with it, our inheritance and belonging 
in it, something more profound than all polarity and duality’ 
(Ricoeur 1986:85). When we attribute feelings to objects (it is 
desirable, repellent) we appear to be dealing with objective 
qualities. But they are not qualities that confront the subject 
like objects – they are rather the intentional expression of a 
unifying bond with the world. I am affectively present in the 
world. That is why Ricoeur calls feeling the colour of soul: ‘It 
is the landscape which is cheerful, and it is I who am elated’ 
(Ricoeur 1986:89).40 
If paradox, separation and the finitude–infinity conundrum 
are part of objective knowledge, they are all the more so when 
we take into account their affective aspects, where the focus 
is on the person rather than the thing. Things in themselves 
have a certain affective value (e.g. they attract, repel or are 
neutral). This is what motivates the will and directs human 
intentionality. Ricoeur (1986:151, n.2) puts it thus: ‘Now, 
the movement of the self, in its prereflective naïveté, lies in 
the intentional moment through which I break through to 
the world of possibilities, of eventualities, of novel events.’ 
The will assumes objects (people and things) extraneous to 
me in the same way that I perceive objects as extraneous to 
me. The affective value of things outside the person arouses 
39.Although rati onality functi ons via emoti on, we are not always aware of it, because 
as a rule the emotion is ‘neutral’. We could speak of hierarchic rational levels, 
at which emotion plays a greater or lesser role on the principle that the more it 
concerns our life world, the more likely that affect will feature. We do not look 
for an affective dimension in ‘neutral’ scientific activities such as solving a maths 
problem, working out a formula, or checking the construction of a bridge. Yet these 
activities, too, are accompanied by constant interaction between human subject 
and rationally determined object (cf. Hegel). Affect features more noticeably 
in the human sciences, since they have to do with people. Examples are law, 
ethics, political science, art and religion. It is very prominent in novels that deal 
with human relations and most conspicuous when one communicates traumatic 
personal circumstances. 
40.It is remarkable that our sense of touch, which is not unassociated with feeling 
and emotion, has been neglected ever since the time of the Greeks, Christianity 
and post-Enlightenment philosophy (see Walton 2004:146ff). The sense of sight 
(vision) is preferred, because it is associated with light, reason and understanding. 
Sight was symbolised by fire (the sun) and God lived in inaccessible light. Light, 
like reason, was conceived of as masculine. Plotinus’s One in the Enneads was 
disembodied, hence not associated with touch. It was symbolised by the sun. 
Touch was symbolised by earth. It also epitomises emotion, desire and is feminine, 
capricious. Separation, which includes infinitude and desire, precludes touch and 
hence intimacy as well. Yet knowledge without touch is not conceivable. My first 
impulse on seeing something beautiful or new is to pick it up or touch it. What the 
eye sees and the hand touches is a single movement. Ward (2007:117–118) puts it 
thus: ‘Through touch there is movement within the soul such that the whole person 
is caught up in the circulations of desire – the desire of the other as well as that 
person’s desire for the other ...If, then, such intuition, contemplation, imagination, 
movement and desire depend upon touch, then the ensouled flesh in not monadic. 
It only realizes itself in community; in political and erotic communities or ekklesia.’
desire or revulsion and activates the will. This affirms human 
finitude in the same way perception does. ‘Accordingly, if 
desire is a form of receptivity, analogous to that of perception 
but different in a way, in what does its infinitude consist?’ 
(Ricoeur 1986:151, n.2).
His answer read as follows:
It is an experience of lack of ... an impulse toward ... In desire I 
am outside myself; I am with the desirable in the world. In short, 
in desire I am open to all the affective tones of things that attract 
of repel me. 
(Ricoeur 1986:52–53) 
Ricoeur does not look into the reason why something attracts 
or repels me, why I desire it or not, why it activates or does 
not activate my will.41 It is probably the result of several 
complex factors ranging from a particular need that we have 
at a given time to certain likes and dislikes that develop over 
a long period. The latter are preferences or tastes acquired 
over time, which Ricoeur (1986:57ff) calls habit, inertia or a 
form of perseverance. ‘Each of us has his way of loving and 
hating, and this love and hate reflect his whole personality’ 
(Ricoeur 1986:60). Thus affect determines what emerges 
in our likes and dislikes, and hence our personality and 
character. Accordingly, character is not ‘not the result of 
taking a position’ (Ricoeur 1986:62) but something I receive 
and ‘I do not know the meaning of this gift that makes me the 
heir to my own life’ (Ricoeur 1986:63).
The synthesis of desire and reason (power of obligation that 
comes from practical reason) is respect (Ricoeur 1986:73). 
Reason is practical only if it influences desire: 
The important thing is that through this emotion of subdued 
desire that faculty of desiring is ‘elevated’ to the level of reason, 
and that in this way self-esteem is born in the heart of this 
finitude elevated to reason. 
(Ricoeur 1986:74)
Self-transcendence in the mode of a 
secularised consumer culture 
Emerson’s work is the paradigm for secular spirituality that 
has emerged in recent years. Secular spirituality has the same 
emphasis on nature, emotion, the unconscious, freedom, 
unity and self-construction that we find in Emerson. Does 
that mean we successfully accommodate affectivity in selfknowledge
and self-construction? It is a tricky question. 
In one instance, there is greater emphasis on experience 
(proliferation of charismatic emotive religions), as well as 
numerous examples in the field of secular spirituality, with 
its renewed focus on nature, self, transcendence and the way 
we can encounter it in meditation and mystical experience. 
The entertainment industry focuses on experience and 
the emotion it evokes. The media zoom in on the drama of 
catastrophes wherever they happen on our planet. We are 
moved and respond positively. But the media also present 
a culture of violence and reified sexuality. On the one 
41.Here one is reminded of Girard’s philosophy of desire, in which desire is aroused 
by what the other possesses (see Hegel 1959:123. For Girard’s view of desire, see 
Du Toit 2008:1–33.)
Page 10 of 12
 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za doi:10.4102/hts.v67i3.944
hand there is greater recognition of our bodily nature as a 
means to pleasure. On the other hand our individualised 
society is marked by a loss of fellowship and collective 
emotion, with the possible exception of sporting events. The 
plethora of courses in self-discovery, self-construction, selfassertion,
self-actualisation and the like certainly promote 
acknowledgment and a positive image of affectivity. 
Transcendent experience and self-transcendence are bound 
to be different in a disenchanted world. Accounts of natural 
events cannot but affect our concept of God. Western 
ontology, which grew from philosophical and theological 
interpretations, was overthrown by science. Science was put 
at the service of humankind by technology and available 
technologies became the main factor in the design of new 
technologies of self that manifest themselves in present-day 
consumer society. Transcendence comes via both virtual and 
real experiences that make up our technological rollercoaster 
society. 
One could argue that transcendence in present-day consumer 
society differs from all earlier transcendental movements – 
outwards (nature), upwards (God) and inwards (thought, 
metaphysics). Self-transcendence is characterised not by 
‘movement towards…’ but by ‘movement with…’ We move 
in, through and with technology, which has become an 
extension of self. It is not so much that self-transcendence 
is effected by the unconscious, by affectivity or by inner 
creativity. It rather concerns the way in which self-identity 
is governed by the technologically extended self42 (selftranscendence
is increasingly co-determined by social 
and technological patterns laid down by the consumer, 
advertising and IT society in which we live). Morality and 
dialogue with others and self play a dwindling role in selfconstruction
(Hankiss 2006:287). 
Conclusion 
Self-transcendence is the mode in which we experience 
ourselves. It is characterised by awareness of desire 
(Eros) in the form of unfulfilment and incompleteness. 
Religiously it translates into sin, but it may also be regarded 
as a natural, inevitable manifestation of consciousness 
and self-consciousness. Whereas it was once ascribed to 
transcendent forces acting on human beings, nowadays 
people are increasingly harnessing it in their attempts at selfconstruction.
Self-transcendence cannot be explained in isolation; 
human biology, affectivity and the unconscious come into 
the picture as well. One also has to take into account the 
contents of consciousness and their influence on people 
(concepts like separation, infinitude, desire, the O/other). 
In addition, cultural artefacts also help us to construct 
42.Hankiss (2006) mentions everyday things without which self is inconceivable: 
the first cigarette and coffee in the morning (26ff), mirrors, toothpaste, the gym, 
coiffure, perfume, makeup, jewellery and shoes (28–43). There are also techniques: 
etiquette (75ff), the role of ‘white lies’ (78ff), as well as the role of mobile phones 
and the Internet (84ff). He describes how the workplace (101ff) and the home with 
its objects (123ff) determine self. These things combine to trigger a renaissance of 
the proletariat (161ff) and the inescapable demise of self (198ff). 
diverse selves. In view of all this, it is apparent that human 
wiring for transcendence cannot be confined to a particular 
religious tradition or theology. In contrast to modernism, 
people’s relation to the other (God, world, fellow humans, 
ideas) is no longer regulated exclusively by concepts such 
as metaphysical truth, hierarchy, tradition and established 
value systems, but by self-construction (see Bildung) that 
assumes a pragmatic, eclectic style – a worldview reinforced 
by a human rights culture that endorses freedom (of religion, 
expression, association, the press, minorities) and dignity 
irrespective of race, gender, sexual orientation, culture and 
the like.43 
Perceptions of self and self-transcendence are changing 
radically. But must we appraise these changes moralistically? 
Every generation finds transcendence within the interpretive 
horizons permitted by their culture, science and worldview. 
There are biological constants (neocortex, lymphatic system) 
and mental constants (desire, infinity, unfulfilment), but 
they manifest themselves differently in every era. The 
remarkable feature of our age is that transcendence is no 
longer encapsulated in metaphysical ideas, but comes to 
us via our techno-scientific environment that sweeps us 
along on its evolutionary current. We cannot artificially 
perpetuate the enchantment of a world we have outgrown. 
And why should we? The Middle Ages would have seen our 
present-day world as a dream come true and many people 
today undeniably find fulfilment in a virtual, consumer and 
pleasure-centred environment. As disenchanted as it may be, 
it is certainly not devoid of transcendence.
References
Barabas, M., 1977, ‘Transcending the human’, in D.Z. Philips & T. Tessin (eds.), Religion 
without transcendence?, pp. 177−232, Macmillan, London.
Buber, M., 1939, Man in revolt, Westminster Press, Philadelphia.
Caputo, J.D. & Vattimo, G., 2007, After the death of God, Columbia University Press, 
New York.
Dalferth, I.U., 2007, ‘Beyond understanding?’, in A. Grøn, I. Damgaard & S. Overgaard 
(eds.), Subjectivity and transcendence, pp. 37−54, Siebert Mohr, Tübingen.
Dupré, L., 1976, Transcendent selfhood. The loss and rediscovery of inner life, Seabury 
Press, New York.
Du Toit, C.W., 2004a, ‘Diversity in a multicultural and polyethnic world: Challenges and 
responses’, Verbum et Ecclesia 25(2), 442−459.
Du Toit, C.W., 2004b, ‘Technoscience and the integrity of personhood in Africa and 
in the West: Facing our technoscientific environment, in C.W. du Toit (ed.), The 
integrity of the human person in an African context: perspectives from science and 
religion, pp. 1–46 Research Institute for Theology and Religion, Pretoria.
Du Toit, C.W., 2007, Viewed from the shoulders of God. Themes in science and 
theology, Unisa, Pretoria.
Du Toit, C.W., 2008, ‘Is religion grounded in evolution? A critical look at some models’, 
in C.W. du Toit (ed.), The evolutionary roots of religion: Cultivate, mutate or 
eliminate?, Research Institute for Theology and Religion, Pretoria. 
Du Toit, C.W., 2010, ‘Perspectives on an ethics of power sharing in Africa’, in C.W. du 
Toit (ed.), Power sharing and African democracy, pp. 45−69, Research Institute for 
Theology and Religion, Pretoria. 
Faulconer, J.E. (ed.), 2003, Transcendence in philosophy and religion, Indiana 
University Press, Bloomington.
Frandsen, H.V., 2007, ‘Transcendence of the appeal – Sovereignty of the subject’, in 
A. Grøn, I. Damgaard & S. Overgaard (eds.), Subjectivity and transcendence, pp. 
115−131, Siebert Mohr, Tübingen.
Gill, J.H., 1989, Mediated transcendence. A postmodern reflection, Mercer University 
Press, Macon.
Gougeon, L., 2007, Emerson and Eros. The making of a cultural hero, State University 
of New York Press, Albany.
Hankiss, E., 2006, The toothpaste of immortality. Self-constructing in the consumer 
age, John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
43.‘People have to construct themselves in a world that worships rationality and, at 
the same time, longs for spirituality and mysticism’ (Hankiss 2006:267). 
Page 11 of 12
 Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za doi:10.4102/hts.v67i3.944
Page 12 of 12
Hegel, G.W.F., 1959 [1817], Encyclopedia of philosophy, transl. G.E. Mueller, 
Philosophical Library, New York.
Hegel, G.W.F., 1985 [1827], Lectures on the philosophy of religion, vol. III, The 
consummate religion, University of California Press, Berkeley.
Hyland, D.A., 1995, Finitude and transcendence in the Platonic dialogues, State 
University of New York Press, Albany.
Janz, P.D., 2004, God, the mind’s desire. Reference, reason and Christian thinking, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Levinas E., 1979 [1969], Totality and infinity, Nijhof, The Hague.
Malpas, J., 2007, ‘Heidegger’s topology of being’, in S. Crowell & J. Malpas (eds.), 
Transcendental Heidegger, pp. 119−134, Stanford University Press, Stanford. 
Nancy, J.-L., 2002, Hegel. The restlessness of the negative, University of Minnesota 
Press, Minneapolis.
Parnas J., 2007, ‘Subjectivity in schizophrenia: The minimal self is too small’, in A. 
Grøn, I. Damgaard & S. Overgaard (eds.), Subjectivity and transcendence, pp. 
55−70, Siebert Mohr, Tübingen.
Philips, D.Z. & Tessin, T. (eds.), 1997, Religion without transcendence?, Macmillan, 
London.
Ricoeur, P., 1986, Fallible man, Fordham University Press, New York.
Ricoeur, P., 1992, Oneself as another, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Ryle, G., 1949, The concept of mind, Penguin, Harmondsworth.
Vattimo, G., 2003, Nihilism and emancipation, Columbia University Press, New York.
Walton, S., 2004, Humanity. An emotional history, Atlantic, London.
Ward, G., 2007, ‘The logos, the body and the world: On the phenomenal border’, 
in K. Vanhoozer & M. Warner (eds.), Transcending boundaries in philosophy and 
theology, Ashgate, Hampshire.
Wider, K., 1977, The bodily nature of consciousness, Cornell University Press, Ithaca.
Žižek, S., 2003, The puppet and the dwarf, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge. 
