The Price of Heaven: Remaking Politics in All that
Heaven Allows, Ali: Fear Eats the Soul, and Far
from Heaven
by Salomé Aguilera Skvirsky
Abstract: This essay investigates identity politics in Todd Haynes’s 2002 film, Far
from Heaven, and in two of its precursors, Douglas Sirk’s All that Heaven Allows
and Rainer Werner Fassbinder’s Ali: Fear Eats the Soul. It takes as its starting
point two puzzling features of Haynes’s film: the oddity of setting a remake in the
same time and place as its original, and the film’s banal representation of racism
and homophobia. The essay proposes a reading of Far from Heaven in which the
film questions the ability of melodrama to plausibly address contemporary forms
of social injustice.
Todd Haynes’s Far from Heaven (2002) is a remake of Douglas Sirk’s All that
Heaven Allows, a 1955 family melodrama about a bourgeois widow who begins an
affair with her young gardener only to be ostracized by her high-society peers.
Like Sirk’s original, Haynes’s remake is set in a suburban hamlet in the northeast
circa 1957. Unlike the original, Haynes’s film dispenses with the class and generational
conflicts of All that Heaven Allows, replacing these with conflicts over inter-
racial love and sexual orientation.
Haynes’s film is not the first reworking of All that Heaven Allows. Rainer
Werner Fassbinder’s 1974 film, Ali: Fear Eats the Soul, also revises Sirk’s original.
Fassbinder’s version depicts the troubled affair of an elderly German cleaning
woman and a significantly younger, black Moroccan “guest worker” who has come
to Munich as part of Germany’s postwar labor recruitment program.
Many writers have observed that Haynes’s film stands in a complicated relation
both to the two earlier texts, and to the contemporary moment. Some have ar-
gued that this is an “historical” film, bent on exposing the less than pristine
realities secreted away behind the smooth patina of Eisenhower’s America, and
obscured by representations of the time (like Sirk’s) that were constrained by convention
and the Production Code.1 Others have said that Far from Heaven arro-
gantly condescends to the past, overconfident that there has been significant social
progress in the intervening years.2
90 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
© 2008 by the University of Texas Press, P.O. Box 7819, Austin, TX 78713-7819
Salomé Aguilera Skvirsky is a PhD candidate in the English Department at the University
of Pittsburgh. She is working on her dissertation, currently titled “The Ethnic Turn: Political
Cinema in Brazil, Cuba, and the United States, 1960–2005.” This essay won first prize
in the 2005 SCMS student writing competition.
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 90
 I will argue, conversely, that Far from Heaven eludes many of the categories
that would allow us to make sense of its relation to either Sirk or Fassbinder, or its
relation to the contemporary moment. By setting its narrative in the same time
and place as the original, Far from Heaven fails to do what most remakes do—
update the original. Nor does Far from Heaven quite fit Fredric Jameson’s category
of the “nostalgia film”—a film that evokes a past by imitating the stylistic
tropes of that historical moment’s representations of itself, but that is neither
properly historical nor contemporary.3 Haynes’s film is too self-reflexive to fit this
description.
The greatest obstacle to making sense of Far from Heaven’s relation to the
present is its seemingly banal treatment of race and sexual orientation. The displays
of racism and homophobia and the surface-level injunction to tolerance and
color blindness seem, from a contemporary vantage point, hopelessly outdated. If
we insist on such a flatfooted reading, we are forced to conclude that Far from
Heaven is indeed an “historical film” bent on highlighting our social progress, the
difference between then and now, past and present; and we are left feeling an uneasy
sort of relief that, at least, times change.
Far from Heaven responds to the problematic of coalition politics set up in
Ali: Fear Eats the Soul, which in turn recasts All that Heaven Allows as a film
about identity and class politics. In this essay, I propose an alternative reading of
Far from Heaven’s seemingly straightforward, and ultimately banal, critique of the
racism and homophobia of fifties society. What is being represented in the film is
not so much the twin ills of a bygone era, but the contemporary crisis over who,
properly, constitutes the subject of historical agency. The film deconstructs the
promise of identity politics and the coalitions forged on their basis. And as it disavows
identity politics at the level of the narrative, the film distances itself from
the melodramatic mode at the level of generic mode. The interest of Haynes’s film
lies in the way it questions the ability of the moralizing mode of melodrama to address
the social issues of the contemporary historical moment.
The Nostalgia Film and the Remake. According to Fredric Jameson, postmodernism
is the cultural correlate of a third stage of capitalism, what he calls
“late” or “multinational” capitalism. Postmodernism is characterized by, among
other things, the erosion of historicity—that is, the loss of “the perception of
the present as history.”4 Genuine historicity would entail a representation that
achieves a defamiliarization of the present, one that “allows us that distance from
immediacy which is at length characterized as a historical perspective.”5 The
nostalgia mode in film is just one more symptom of the postmodern erosion of
historicity.
For Jameson, the nostalgia film may be understood narrowly or broadly.6 Narrowly
conceived, it includes films set in the past and “about specific generational
moments of that past”;7 American Graffiti (George Lucas), a 1973 film about the
1960s, or Chinatown (Roman Polanski), a 1974 film about the 1930s, would fit this
Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 91
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 91
 description. Yet, for Jameson, this approach to the past is inevitably pervaded by
pastiche, defined as the “the imitation of a peculiar or unique style … without
parody’s ulterior motive.”8 These films about the past are “never really a matter of
some old-fashioned ‘representation’ of historical content, but instead approach the
‘past’ through stylistic connotation, conveying ‘pastness’ by the glossy qualities of
the image, and ‘1930s-ness’ or ‘1950s-ness’ by the attributes of fashion.”9
In Jameson’s broader conception, a nostalgia film is any film—set in the past
or in the present—that makes use of pastiche. And inasmuch as they typically
make use of pastiche, remakes are paradigmatic examples of nostalgia films.10
Jameson uses Body Heat—Lawrence Kasdan’s 1981 remake of Double Indemnity
(Billy Wilder, 1944)—as an example. Set in contemporary (1981) Florida, the
film makes use of pastiche in its choice of Art Deco credits and in the virtual absence
of the objects of late capitalism—such as high-rise buildings and contem-
porary appliances—that would allow the viewer to locate the film in the historical
present.11
The nostalgia film turns the viewer’s present moment into an eternal past that
is beyond real historical time and thus closed off to the intervention of human
agency. The resulting representation is neither a representation of the past nor a
representation of the present, both of which necessarily elude us in this new historical
situation.12 For Jameson, it is not the case that genuine historicity would
allow a representation of the “real past” (i.e., something other than a simulacrum
of the past), but rather that historicity “can first and foremost be defined as a perception
of the present as history.”13
Far from Heaven appears to be a nostalgia film on both the broad and the
narrow conceptions, and therefore doubly nostalgic: it is set in the past (1957), and
it is a remake of Sirk’s All that Heaven Allows that indulges in pastiche. But I will
argue that Far From Heaven does not do what nostalgia films do—it does not efface
the present.14
Far from Heaven is not a typical remake.15 In his discussion of the remake,
Thomas Leitch identifies four types, each characterized by a different relation
to the original: the “readaptation,” the “update,” the “homage,” and the “true remake.”16
The first two are not relevant to this discussion, as they primarily engage
the filmic remake’s relation to a classic literary text. The third taxonomic category
sketched by Leitch is the “homage,” which has been mainly a European trend.
The homage treats its cinematic precursor as a classic “in danger of being ignored
or forgotten.”17 The homage defines the relation between two cinematic texts—
it valorizes the earlier one without trying to replace it. It is a film that has no life
outside of its intertextual relation to the original; it succumbs entirely to the 
authority of the original. The homage manages the “enabling paradox” of the 
remake—that it is like the original, only better—by opting out, by relinquishing
any assertion of superiority.18 Far from Heaven should not be considered 
an homage because it is not primarily allusive: while it clearly hopes to refocus
attention on a forgotten master, it also provokes a broader examination of the
92 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 92
 representational strategies of that master. Far from Heaven retains an autonomy
and ambition of its own, which is not characteristic of the homage.19
The fourth species of remake, the “true remake,” is, for Leitch, the paradigmatic
form. The true remake relies most visibly on a triangular relationship be-
tween three texts: an original (usually a literary text), which it tries to usurp; a
second remake, which it borrows from but disavows; and itself. Using Body Heat
as an example, Leitch argues that the elements of pastiche, the evocations of the
1940s, function to call attention to Double Indemnity in order to disavow its own
discursive markers; then it “liberates values that were present in the story [James
Cain’s novel] all along but were obscured by the circumstances of its earlier incarnation
[Double Indemnity],”20 namely unseen sexual content. The true remake
claims the story and concomitant prestige of the original and updates that story,
then it borrows the discourse of its cinematic precursor while disavowing its story.
The effect is that, “[t]he [true] remake … takes what is presented as a classic,
timeless story and updates it—partly by the paradoxical attempt to remove all
markers of any historical period whatever.”21 This is accomplished by a systematic
effacement of signs of the remake’s time period through the mining of a past discursive
incarnation (the second version). “The true remake is pretending, in effect,
that it has no discourse of its own to become outdated”;22 it presents itself as a
work outside of time.
Far from Heaven does evince this kind of triangular relationship, situating itself
vis-à-vis both Sirk’s All that Heaven Allows and Fassbinder’s Ali: Fear Eats the
Soul, to which it does not make explicit reference. But while Leitch’s model of the
true remake disavows both its intertextuality and its own textuality in a struggle
against time, Far from Heaven disavows neither, citing a source—Douglas Sirk—
for both. The film copies Sirk’s discourse more closely than his story. Far From
Heaven copies scenes and sequences from Sirk almost verbatim (including the
credits), while making major adjustments to Sirk’s original story. Because it explicitly
locates itself in the past—the fifties—it cannot be said to be pretending it is
contemporary. It is peculiar in that it does not update the original as Body Heat
updates its original, Double Indemnity, simultaneously employing simulacra of the
forties while eschewing the explicit reference. Rather, Far From Heaven produces
the original as the original: the diegetic time of the original and its copy are the
same (though produced close to fifty years apart, both are set in 1950s New England),
and Sirk’s aesthetics have been closely reproduced.23
The obvious question is: Why present a remake as an original—why “re-do”
a film? One answer is that the project of the film is, as Sharon Willis puts it in her
essay, “The Politics of Disappointment,” “archeological”:24 it aims to excavate the
social reality of fifties desire, a reality that could not have been presented in the
original.25 Following this reading, Far from Heaven is a backward-looking historical
film that aims to represent the “real past” and fails—as nostalgia films in-
evitably do. But this reading cannot account for the imitation of Sirkian aesthetics
and the observance of certain production codes of the time (e.g. the prohibition
Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 93
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 93
 against interracial sex on screen), and it turns Far from Heaven into just another
example of postmodern artistic production à la Jameson.
Far from Heaven “re-does” All that Heaven Allows not in order to expose the
dirty laundry of the past, but rather in order to say something about the present.
Far from Heaven is a very special kind of remake. If most remakes update the time
and/or place of the original, but keep the narrative roughly the same, Far from
Heaven imitates the discourse and preserves the historical setting of the original,
but modifies the story in significant ways. By presenting the same story in a different
historical setting, most remakes emphasize the timelessness of the story. By
presenting a different story in the same historical setting with roughly the same
aesthetics, Far from Heaven emphasizes the adjustments it has made to the narrative;
herein lies its contemporaneity. The contemporary content of Far from
Heaven is, as it were, the arithmetic difference between its narrative and that of
the original. This difference is what needs to be explained.
Far from Heaven may be a species of remake, but it is not a nostalgia film, at
least not in spirit, for it does not stage the past as present, and thus timeless. Nor
does it stage the past as true history, the way an historical film does. Rather, it casts
the present as past history, forcing us to register our historical situatedness. In
Jameson’s terms, it may be considered an attempt to recuperate historicity and
fashion an “aesthetic representation of our own current experience.”26 It manages
to put the past (represented by a discourse that self-consciously presents itself as
discourse and not as reality) and the present (represented by new story content)
together in the same frame. Far from Heaven forces one to ask: “What has
changed since then?”
Haynes’s film receives a measure of its timeliness from the adjustments it
makes, at the level of narrative, to All that Heaven Allows. These adjustments involve
the expansion of identity positions, from class and gender in All that Heaven
Allows to race, gender, and sexuality in Far from Heaven. But the adjustments owe
much to Fassbinder’s own reworking of Sirk’s film in Ali: Fear Eats the Soul.
Haynes’s impulse is not toward a timeless depiction, but the reverse. Time, history,
and the nature of change are the subject of the film.
All that Heaven Allows and the Thoreauvian Ideal. All that Heaven Allows
is the story of a middle-aged bourgeois widow, Cary Scott (Jane Wyman), her affair
with a younger gardener, Ron Kirby (Rock Hudson), and the community that
shuns her because of the relationship. The nature of Cary’s transgression is ambiguous.
Does the disapproval of the community and her children owe more to
Ron’s age, or his class? Is the object of their ridicule the inappropriateness of 
female desire, or that of cross-class fraternizing? From the outside, it looks as
though only desire could explain their relationship. What else could Cary want
with a “gardener” but sex (“a good looking set of muscles,” as her son puts it)? And
what else could Ron want with Cary but her money? The age conflict refers us
94 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 94
 back to the class conflict; the two are inextricably linked, but the film obscures the
nature of the latter.27
Cary’s Stoningham community misrecognizes the union between Cary and
Ron as one that transgresses class barriers and breaches decorum.28 Ron may be
working as a gardener, but he is not a wage laborer; he is not selling his laborpower
for an hourly fee: he is a member of the bourgeoisie. Perhaps this is why
Cary constantly reassures her children and friends that “if they knew him, they
would like him.” They would like him if only they knew what she knows—namely,
that he is not only a gardener, but also a successful small businessman.
Early in the film, when Ron first introduces himself to Cary, he establishes
the basis of the distinction. He tells Cary that 1) he is old Kirby’s son, inheritor
of the business, and not a hired worker; 2) he has studied agriculture in school
(i.e., he is in some sense a professional); and 3) yard work is not essential to his
livelihood—he has better things in store, namely, his nursery business (so he
probably will not be coming back next autumn). The relationship is consolidated
only after Ron is tied to the American philosophical legacy of Henry David
Thoreau. With this philosophical foundation, Ron’s status as “just” a gardener is
fully disavowed, and romance becomes possible.
In her essay “Melodrama Revisited,” Linda Williams posits that the primary
ideological function of the melodramatic film text is to deliver moral legibility, or
the assignation of guilt and innocence in a post-sacred world in which the surface
of reality is deceptive, masking the hidden source of all value and meaning. The
melodramatic text delivers this moral legibility by focusing on victim-heroes and
the “the recognition of a hidden or misunderstood virtue.”29 In All that Heaven Allows,
Ron is the character of unrecognized virtue: it is his virtue that Cary and the
viewer come to see, and that Stoningham refuses to acknowledge.30 But in what
does Ron’s virtue consist? He is virtuous inasmuch as he has rejected the consumerism
of the country club set. Let us be clear: he rejects this consumerism on
principle. Virtue is shown here by freely chosen actions.31 And Ron can be virtuous
in this way precisely because he is not really the wage laborer that he appears
to be. The wage laborer is not a wage laborer by choice: he cannot quit civilization,
retreating to his inherited plot of land in the country to grow green beans in
solitude. Ron appears in the film wielding Thoreau, a good chunk of land, and a
beloved nursery project. Had Ron been cast as a “real” wage laborer, his censure
of Cary’s world would have looked comparatively weaker: a worker’s declaration of
moral contempt for such a world would seem like ressentiment and not the action
of a free and noble individual. The sign of Ron’s virtue is simultaneously the sign
of his class position and the basis of Cary’s admiration and of the community’s
misunderstanding.
All that Heaven Allows contains a critique of consumer society. But the 
critique is moralistic and not political in that it targets wayward individuals 
and not dysfunctional systems. Cary’s people are craven: if pressed, they would
Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 95
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 95
 recognize the superiority of Ron’s principles to theirs, but still they could not live
by them. Ron’s alternative idyllic natural world is cast as a nonexploitative, simple
commodity-producing utopia peopled with charming petit-bourgeois artisans
wringing their means of life from land, sea, and air. Ron and his friends value nature,
authenticity, craftsmanship, and, ultimately, unalienated manual labor. They
struggle—sufficiently free from material need—to realize their principles in
practice. This is a conflict of values, and not a class conflict: it is a quibble internal
to the bourgeoisie.
In his book on Sirk, Jon Halliday has remarked that the director built into this
film “the history of the concealed disintegration of the society.”32 He set the film in
New England, “the place where contemporary America started, and started to go
wrong.”33 In Halliday’s view, “Hudson and his trees are both America’s past and
America’s ideals. They are ideals which are unattainable—and, when they actually
offer themselves in concrete form, are swiftly rejected by Wyman and her bourgeois
friends on her behalf.”34 But, in fact, it is not the ideals that are rejected.
Cary’s friends know nothing of Ron’s ideals: they assume that Ron is what he appears
to be, namely a wage laborer. Cary is not unlike her friends: she just knows
more about Ron. She admires him precisely for his ideals, as, if they took the time,
they would too. If Cary rejects Ron (temporarily), it is for practical reasons, out of
convenience, and with the knowledge that in another sort of world, she, too, could
live by such principles. The ideals themselves are not contested in the film.35
But if the film is sympathetic to Ron’s Thoreauvian ideals, why does the natural
world, the synecdoche of these ideals, appear so contrived?36 A good example
of this contrivance is the appearance of a deer in the picture window at the film’s
end, as Cary cares for Ron after his fall from the side of the mountain. Film scholars
have said that the stylized representation of natural spaces serves an ironic pur-
pose: to delegitimize the Thoreauvian ideal.37 But another reading is possible. The
use of techniques of Brechtian defamiliarization to depict Ron’s world (so often
commented on in the Sirk literature) situate the ideal in a mythic historical past, a
time before modernity.38 In other words, the contrived natural spaces may be seen
as functioning nostalgically, rather than ironically.39
Tracing the etymology of “nostalgia” in her essay “Irony, Nostalgia, and the
Postmodern,” Linda Hutcheon tracks the term from its roots as a seventeenthcentury
medical term designating severe, but curable, homesickness to an 
eighteenth-century term designating an incurable psychic condition: 
What made that transition possible was a shift in site from the spatial to the temporal.
Nostalgia was no longer simply a yearning to return home … [Sufferers] in fact, did
not want to return to a place, but to a time, a time of youth. Time, unlike space, cannot
be returned to—ever; time is irreversible. And nostalgia becomes the reaction to
that sad fact.40
All that Heaven Allows presents two different time periods contiguously: there is,
on the one hand, the present of its production—the 1950s—represented by
Cary’s world; and on the other hand, a mythic pastoral American past the film
96 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 96
 wishes to use as the basis for its critique of the present, represented by Ron’s
utopian world. Ron’s world represents a space of innocence. One central feature
of the melodramatic mode, according to Williams, is that it begins and wants to
end in such a space.41
According to Hutcheon, the pathos of nostalgic representation “depends precisely
on the irrecoverable nature of the past.”42 If the film’s happy ending seems
somehow hollow, it is because Ron’s world does not exist within the same temporal
frame as Cary’s. Situating the ideal in an irrecoverable past is the source of the
film’s pathos; even a nominally reunited couple cannot affect the sense that, using
Williams’s terms, it is too late, that the real object of loss in this melodramatic text
is time, a time when the ideal was also attainable.43 What would the story of the
disintegrating consumer society look like if there were no yardstick, no ideal, by
which to measure the society’s self-betrayal? The Thoreauvian point of view represents
the ideal—“the good.” And All that Heaven Allows tries to make that
moral good legible, if irrecoverably remote.
That the critique of the decadent present is made under the banner of Thoreauvian
transcendentalism, also notoriously nostalgic, is fitting. Sirk himself
lamented that this aspect of the film had been so neglected in the film’s reception.44
Thoreau was writing in the period between the Revolutionary War and the
Civil War, when New England was undergoing a major “ecosocial transformation.”45
The agricultural and mercantile order of the colonial period was being re-
placed by the first stage of modern capitalism. The result was a starkly divided
class society with new levels of immiseration, exploitation, and technological innovation.46
Amidst these developments in the 1830s were worker’s strikes, grow-
ing unrest, and the prospect of violent class warfare.47 Faced with an organized
Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 97
Figure 1. Cary (Jane Wyman) reads from Henry David Thoreau’s Walden
in Douglas Sirk’s All That Heaven Allows (Universal, 1955).
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 97
 working class and economic crisis, Thoreau’s model for social change posits the
priority of self-transformation.48 Leo Marx has argued in The Machine in the Garden
that Thoreau’s criticism of New England society is moralistic, and not politi-
cal.49 Echoing this view, Lance Newman writes in “Thoreau’s Natural Community
and Utopian Socialism”: “Thoreau … focused, again, on the importance of ethical
regeneration, of programs for the moral reform of a backslidden elite … The object
of concern here is not the working class but the potentially salvageable bour-
geois slave-driver of himself, who single-mindedly pursues material wealth.”50
It is worth noting that while All that Heaven Allows strategically makes invisible
the urban space, the white working class, and the African American—figures
whose reproach of consumer society cannot be contained by a merely ethical critique
of the spiritual poverty of the elite—the hope for this society was embodied
in the figure of the diasporic immigrant. This is not surprising, considering that
Sirk himself was an émigré from Germany.
At a certain point in the film, a procession of happy, ostensibly petit-bourgeois
subjects parade in to a party with Ron and Cary at Ron’s friends’ rural cottage.
Each partygoer is introduced to Cary with a reference to his or her vocation: we
have the beekeeper who moonlights as an “artist”; we have the bird-watcher and
Audubon society volunteer; we have the plump, stubbly Mexican fisherman51 and
his Spanish-speaking wife and daughter.52 The residents of Ron’s idyllic premodern
utopia are self-employed, and have an unalienated relationship to their own
labor as well as to nature.
Ali: Fear Eats the Soul and the Internal Remake. By presenting a crossethnic
worker solidarity, Ali: Fear Eats the Soul 53 ultimately inverts All that
Heaven Allows, which it reads as depicting not a cross-class solidarity, but rather
the alliance of petit bourgeoisie and haut bourgeoisie sanctioned by an ideology of
individualism. Fassbinder’s film recuperates the absences of the Sirk text: the
urban space, the working class, and the racial minority. Ali: Fear Eats the Soul
copies neither the discourse nor quite the story of All that Heaven Allows. In some
sense, it updates the Sirk film, setting the action in another place (Munich) and
time (contemporaneous with its making, the 1970s). The relationship between a
much older, widowed cleaning woman and a younger man is central, though their
age difference is more stark, and a racial element is added: Ali (El Hedi ben
Salem) is a “guest worker,” Moroccan and black; he is referred to both as “auslander
[foreigner]” and “schwarz [black man].”54 As in the earlier Sirk film, the
woman, Emmi (Brigitte Mira), is ostracized by her family and community because
of her relationship with this man from outside her social circle.
The mechanism of the remake is central to the internal structure of Ali: Fear
Eats the Soul. The film is divided into two parts: the first part is a disavowal of All
that Heaven Allows; the second part is a remake of the first. The two parts are separated
in the story by a “vacation” that is not represented in the plot; they are sep-
arated on screen by an enigmatic scene in an outdoor café. This three-minute
98 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 98
 scene opens and closes with an extreme long shot of Ali and Emmi sitting across
from each other at a yellow table; they are surrounded by dozens of similar tables
and chairs, all of them empty. The dialogue closely follows the dialogue in All that
Heaven Allows between Cary and her daughter, Kay, as Kay confesses that she
cares what others think of her despite her own better judgment. Kay’s disclosure
deeply impacts her mother, who decides she cannot marry Ron because the marriage
will adversely affect those around her. Emmi, for her part, wet from the rain
and weeping, lays her head on the table and tells Ali that she cannot tolerate being
rejected by the community: “I am so happy yet I can hardly stand it, the way people
hate us … If only you and I were alone in the world.” This last line encapsu-
lates the theme of the first part of the film: the fallacy of a love that is “alone in the
world.” In the face of their troubles, Emmi proposes that they take a vacation, and
go “somewhere where no one will stare at us.” “When we get back,” she says, “it
will all be different. Everyone will be nice to us.” Her prophecy is fulfilled in the
second part of the film. When the couple returns from vacation, there is a marked
change in people’s attitude. People are, literally, nice to them: Ali goes from being
a pariah to being sought after and admired.
The problematic of the first part of Ali—coming to terms with a love that is
not alone in the world—reaches its culmination in the enigmatic café scene, but
it first emerges in a conversation between Emmi and her coworkers. They are discussing
the situation of a German woman who married a Turkish guest worker.
The coworkers are disparaging the woman and rationalizing her subsequent alienation
from the community. Responding to her coworkers, Emmi says of the mar-
ried German woman, “Maybe she needs no one else, if he [her Turkish husband]
Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 99
Figure 2. Cary (Jane Wyman) is introduced to Ron’s (Rock Hudson) friends,
an immigrant lobsterman (Nestor Paiva) and his family (Rosa Turich and
Gia Scala), in Douglas Sirk’s All that Heaven Allows (Universal, 1955).
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 99
 speaks to her.” To which her coworker replies, “No one can live without others. No
one, Emmi.”
The plot of the first part of the film depicts Ali and Emmi’s first meeting and
their subsequent social rejection. Emmi becomes more and more isolated from
the social alliances of her former life: first, her neighbors find the building suddenly
dirty since Ali has moved in; then her coworker refuses to shake Ali’s hand
or even to recognize Emmi’s presence during lunch hour; then her son kicks in her
television and disowns her; then the neighborhood’s petit-bourgeois grocer refuses
to serve Ali until he “learns” German. At the end of this first part of Ali, Emmi is
broken, confessing that her coworker was right—the autonomy of romantic love
is illusory; no one can live without others. The second part of the film then explains
the nature of this dependence. While the film opens with Emmi suspended in
space and time, unattached, alone in a zone of depoliticized individuality, it ends
by situating her in a class context.
When Emmi and Ali return from their vacation, the scenarios of the first part
of the film are replayed, but with a difference. This difference is best exemplified
by the scene that immediately follows the conversation between Ali and Emmi in
the café. The petit-bourgeois shopkeeper, in an exchange with his wife, reverses
100 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
Figure 3. Emmi (Brigitte Mira), excluded by her coworkers because of her
relationship with Ali, sits alone in Rainer Werner Fassbinder’s Ali: Fear
Eats the Soul (New Yorker Films, 1974).
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 100
 his position toward Emmi and Ali under the pressures of the growing dominance
of the supermarket in German society. Discrimination is bad for business.
Wife: Anton, don’t forget she was a good customer … Just walk out and say hello and
everything will be fine … She’ll shop here again.
Anton: I suppose I’d better, now most of them shop at the supermarket … You’re
right: one can’t be too particular in business.
Throughout the second part of the film, relations between Emmi and her
neighbors, family, and coworkers confirm this market logic. Her relationships with
others are shown to be determined, in the last analysis, not by a distorted sense of
decency and morality, but by need. The shopkeeper needs Emmi’s business; her
son Bruno (Peter Gauhe) needs her to babysit his daughter while his wife works;
her neighbor needs her storage space; her coworkers need her cooperation in
order to effectively petition their employer for a raise. At Ali’s place of employment,
when Emmi is ridiculed by his workmates (“Is this your grandmother from
Morocco?”), she confesses not that she loves Ali, but that she needs him (“I need
Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 101
Figure 4. Repetition with a difference: in the second part of Rainer Werner
Fassbinder’s Ali: Fear Eats the Soul (New Yorker Films, 1974), another ostracized
character, Yolanda (Helga Ballhaus), a Yugoslav guest worker, is
framed sitting alone on the stairs, much as Emmi is earlier in the film (see
Figure 3).
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 101
 you … I need you so much”)—the old washerwoman needs the guest worker, just
as the guest worker needs the washerwoman.
The coincident change of attitude in the community as a whole toward Emmi
and Ali that marks the second part of the film is not explained within the diegesis.
The structural repetition in the plot seems incomprehensible at the level of the
story: how can it be that over the period of a “vacation,” the community’s attitude
changes so dramatically and simultaneously?
There is a significant narrative “break” in All that Heaven Allows as well:
Ron’s fall, which functions as a deus ex machina. In both cases, these narrative
breaks should be read metaphorically; they signal temporal breaks. In All that
Heaven Allows, the fall further confirms that Ron’s ideal world belongs to a mythic
pastoral past before modernity. Similarly, in Ali, the time before the vacation and
after seems to correspond to two distinct historical moments. The two films are
distinguished by their differing judgments about that historical past. In All that
Heaven Allows, the corrupt present is compared unfavorably to the glorious past.
In Ali, the discrimination of the pre-vacation past does not appear worse than the
fetishization of the post-vacation present: neither past nor present escapes negative
judgment.
The remake mechanism at work within the film is what allows us to see this:
the second part of Ali remakes the first part (in precisely the way Far from Heaven
remakes All that Heaven Allows), setting it in the same time and place, but adjusting
its story content. The adjustment to the story turns out to be the contempo-
rary face of racism. Because in Ali the passage of time (a mere worker’s vacation)
cannot justify the change in attitude (i.e., the realization that discriminatory practices
do not pay), the film suggests that the new attitude does not represent an ad-
vance or progress or moral epiphany, but rather, a new incarnation of the original
offense. The racism Ali suffers in the first part of the film is hardly worse than the
racism of the second part. Sure, “everyone is nice,” but it becomes clear the problem
was never a matter of “niceness” versus “meanness,” but of something more
fundamental. The internal remake is a useful formal strategy for undermining the
commonly held view that it is “progress” or “evolution” or “moral awakening” that
accounts for the changes in the treatment of minorities; the mechanism governing
change is shown to be the adjustments capitalism makes necessary. The mode of
production is the culprit, while the treatment of the guest worker is a superstructural
reverberation. Ali’s actual situation is little changed from the beginning of the
film to the end. Whether he is rejected or fetishized, his circumstance is little improved;
he is exploited and oppressed all the same. And Ali shares with Emmi this
reality of exploitation.
In offering an economic explanation of the situation of the guest worker 
in Germany, Ali links the struggle of the black guest worker to that of the white
charwoman; they are presented as aligned subjects of historical agency.55 The
film may therefore be read as a look at the challenges of uniting a proletariat fractured
by race, culture, and the unexorcised fascism of the German working class.
102 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 102
 The starkly visible age difference between Brigitte Mira (Emmi) and El Hedi
ben Salem (Ali)—significantly exaggerated from Sirk’s Wyman and Hudson—
underscores the nature of their attraction. Faced with the postmenopausal Mira’s
age-worn visage, it is infeasible to understand the Emmi–Ali union in terms of
traditional romance and individual love-object predilections. This couple cannot
withstand a reading that casts their relationship as one founded on “love at first
sight,” as the diegesis seems to suggest. This cliché depends on the view that desire
is autonomous, spontaneous, and not itself socially produced. But Ali suggests
that even the couple’s “love” is socially determined, and inexplicable without reference
to their structurally analogous social positions in the society.
Thus, the dialogue between Emmi and Ali on the dance floor in the penultimate
sequence of the film must be read allegorically. Ali and Emmi are dancing at
the Asphalt Pub to the same music they danced to upon first meeting.
A: Me sleep with other women.
E: That doesn’t matter, Ali. Not at all.
A: I no want, but all the time nervous.
E: You’re your own master; you can do what you like. I know how old I am; I see myself
in the mirror. I can’t tell you what not to do … but when we’re together we must
be nice to each other. Otherwise life isn’t worth living.
Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 103
Figure 5. The scene that separates the two parts of Rainer Werner Fassbinder’s
Ali: Fear Eats the Soul (New Yorker Films, 1974): Emmi (Brigitte
Mira) and Ali (El Hedi ben Salem) decide to go on vacation.
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 103
 A: I want no other woman, only love you.
E: I love you too. Together we’re strong …
Another clue to this allegorical reading is Ali’s name, which is, of course, not “Ali”
but “El Hedi ben Salem.” The use of “Ali” suggests that this character is a kind of
ethnic guest-worker everyman.56
More support for an allegorical reading involves Barbara (Barbara Valentin),
the blond proprietor of the Asphalt Pub. At one point, Emmi orders a cola, and
when Barbara serves it, she adds nonchalantly but apropos of nothing, “By the
way, I’m the owner.” The remark is puzzling because it is narratively unmotivated.
Why is this detail here? The relationship that Ali begins with Barbara serves as a
foil to his relationship with Emmi. The pub owner is young, blond, and a petit
bourgeois. She is happy to serve guest workers in her pub, offers a postmodern
array of Arab and western music on the pub’s jukebox, and is eager to make couscous
for Ali whenever he comes to visit her. Emmi, by contrast, is an older worker
and a former member of the Nazi party. Thoroughly depoliticized, she is excited
to celebrate her wedding dinner at an Italian “Osteria” that, she proudly reports,
Hitler frequented between 1929 and 1933; and she refuses to make couscous, reproving
Ali, “In Germany people don’t eat couscous.” Ali turns to the pub owner
each time Emmi erupts; the first time on the question of couscous, and the second
time when Emmi and her workmates admire his physique in the third person
as if he were being priced on an auction block—“what soft skin he has,” they say
as they circle him, fingering his muscles. When Ali becomes disturbed by the
scene, Emmi, by way of explanation, tells her friends, again in third person, “He
has his moods; that’s his foreign mentality.”
The encounters with Barbara are explicitly staged as exchanges: the offer of
couscous (“I’ll put the pan on” the blond says eagerly to Ali) precedes a sexual
tableaux depicting the pub owner as she comes to collect her fee. But the pub
owner’s willingness to exchange couscous for sex suggests the film’s understanding
of the role of culture in worker solidarity. As Ali turns from Emmi’s unexorcized
fascism, he encounters in the pub owner a relationship characterized by sheer
commodity exchange: couscous (with all its symbolic cultural content) for sex.
What appears on its face to be her cultural tolerance (and Ali seems drawn into
this view initially) is revealed to be exploitation. Like the petit-bourgeois grocer,
the pub owner is concerned with her bottom line. Culture is not sacred here; it,
too, can be co-opted, repackaged, and sold. If it takes couscous, give him couscous.
Ali flees from Emmi’s latent fascism, only to face a more sophisticated predator.
In the pub owner’s hands, couscous is evacuated of the affective content Ali
associates with it—North African identity, history, tradition, and culture; couscous
becomes merely a unit of exchange. It is the pub owner’s disclosure of her class
status that aligns her with the grocery owner. It also explains Ali’s eventual repudiation
of Barbara, when he tells Emmi as they dance “I want no other woman,
only love you.” To which Emmi replies, “Together we are strong,” suggesting the
104 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 104
 necessity of an interethnic alliance against capitalist exploitation and its superstructural
reverberation, racism.
As soon as Emmi says, “Together we are strong,” Ali collapses on the dance
floor and must be hospitalized for a stomach ulcer. His collapse and hospitalization
act as a qualifier that acknowledges the specificity of racial oppression with-
out undermining the necessity of an interethnic proletariat alliance. To the degree
that Emmi’s subjectivity is socially determined, so is Ali affected by the social context.
The impact of the outside on Ali is registered by his hospitalization from an
ulcer. That the guest worker experience of racism in Germany penetrates to the
literal core of his being—his stomach—suggests the urgency of the situation.57
The final hospital scene in Ali articulates a relation between race and class in
which racism is cast as a threat to the organism, to life itself. In some sense, racism
emerges as primary, trumping everything else: without life (and a compromised digestion
jeopardizes the most basic requirement for life), there is no chance for
worker alliance. This is the predicament, clearly recapitulated at the end of the film:
racism endangers the very cross-ethnic solidarity that will spell racism’s demise.
For the German film historian Thomas Elsaesser, Fassbinder takes a distinctly
anti-identity politics stance:
What makes the depiction of oppressors and oppressed in his films ultimately so difficult
for some audiences is that Fassbinder refuses to assume that there has to be a
natural solidarity between victims. Instead, one finds an almost Buñeulian vision of
the right of outcasts and underdogs to be as mean, inhuman and evil as anyone else.
His portrayal of the victims of society shows what has made them who they are, giving
rise to a picture of cruelty among the underclass which reflects but cannot explain
the cruelty of the dominant class. The decision of not judging his characters from an
external vantage point thus obliges him not to be partisan toward marginal groups
solely on the basis of being marginal.58
What Elsaesser describes is a cinema in which victims both suffer and do not
behave virtuously. In Fassbinder, suffering by itself is not enough to establish
virtue. If the melodramatic mode’s use of suffering as proof of virtue is assimilable
to “partisan[ship] toward marginal groups solely on the basis of being marginal
(i.e. victimized),” then it is this equivalence between suffering and virtue that
Fassbinder refuses by interjecting the counterweight of the victim’s own cruelty.
Recalling Linda Williams’s terminology, this is melodrama without victim-heroes:
suffering does not establish moral virtue, and moral virtue is never misrecognized
because it is beside the point. Elsaesser calls this a “non-judgmental relation to destructive
or evil characters”59; Fassbinder has called it “indulgence [toward char-
acters] to the point of irresponsibility.”60 This nonjudgmental stance is what makes
Ali: Fear Eats the Soul ’s critique of the social world political and not moralistic,
like that of All that Heaven Allows.
The point here is not that Fassbinder’s characters are unvirtuous, rotten, contradictory,
and misguided, and that if they could only be made aware, they would
Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 105
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 105
 change and would begin to make the right life choices. Rather, we have here a situation
in which the dominant ideology is internalized and lived out daily by every-
one, in one way or another. The utopian moment in Fassbinder does not rest with
the virtuous individual activist who imagines himself impervious to ideology, who
imagines that he can change the world by his acts of individual resistance and by
his choice to live his own life (like Ron) as though conditions were ideal. Nor is the
utopian moment to be found in the depiction of a mythic past as in All that Heaven
Allows. The utopian dimension for Fassbinder is, as Elsaesser has pointed out,
embodied by the characters that, though admittedly not virtuous, take “the ‘system’
literally, which is to say, by believing in equality, love, generosity, trust.”61
In Ali, the dance scene is simultaneously a moment of victim solidarity and
the embodiment of the film’s utopian drive. That this solidarity collapses by the
film’s end makes the impulse toward solidarity no less desirable or ideal. The point
is that solidarity is not “natural”; it is something to be sought, but something that
does not depend on the virtuousness of its seekers. The film shows the necessity
of class consciousness, even if it presents, without illusions, the obstacles to its
realization.62
Far from Heaven and Coalition Politics. Far from Heaven is set in 1957 (at
the time of the Little Rock desegregation struggle) in an insular New Haven, Connecticut,
suburb. Cathy (Julianne Moore) and Frank Whitaker (Dennis Quaid) are
featured in advertisements for Frank’s television company, Magnatech. Their marriage
is hardly as perfect as the ads suggest; Frank has affairs with men, and Cathy
begins a “friendship” with Raymond Deagen (Dennis Haysbert), her African
American gardener.
In “The Politics of Disappointment: Todd Haynes Rewrites Douglas Sirk,”
Sharon Willis finds that “it is the moments of referential ‘breakthrough,’ those
instances where the film incorporates contemporary social issues of race and
sexuality, that remain problematic and that trouble—or disappoint—the film’s
logic.”63 The logic to which Willis here refers, and which she claims is “disappoint[ed],”
consists primarily of the structural analogy between racism and homo-
phobia, established by the film’s visual organization.64 The idea is that there is a
“symmetry within its [the film’s] architecture between racial and sexual oppression,
bringing together the violent repressions of both racial mobility and sexual
choice.”65 Willis duly observes the stark differences in the representation of
Raymond’s and Frank’s positions. Raymond is hypervisible, surveilled continuously
by the white community, while Frank remains invisible, until he enters a gay zone.
Raymond is deprived of a point of view and never depicted without Cathy, while
Frank is granted a point of view in scenes that do not include Cathy. Raymond is
featured in an interracial relationship devoid of erotics, while Frank is featured in
the only sexually charged scene in the film—between him and a young man on vacation
with his family. Raymond suffers the worst fate of the film when he must
106 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 106
 sell his business and leave town, while Frank can keep his corporate job and his
new relationship. Willis concludes from this that “Race … is displaced into the
interracial bond and replaced by the white-black couple. Thus, the film’s ‘racial
angle’ fades into a white perspective of fascination with the ongoing mystery of a
black world elsewhere.”66 In other words, the film, by refusing Raymond black
subjectivity—“a black world elsewhere”—turns race into a floating signifier that
eventually attaches itself to the interracial bond, leaving the question of black
identity unanswered.
Willis presupposes that the structural symmetry clearly established between
racism and homophobia in Far from Heaven is an instance of analogy rather than
of disanalogy.67 She takes for granted that the objects of racism and homophobia—
the black man and the gay man—are analogous subjects in an alliance against heteronormative,
mainstream American society: this is her starting point. So when
these figures are represented in such starkly different terms, the only possible conclusion
is that the film disappoints its own logic.
But perhaps the film never accepted the logic that Willis ascribes to it. She
overlooks the possibility that Far from Heaven might be interested in the difference
between racial and sexual identity, rather than their similarity. In fact, Far
from Heaven questions the coalition of “others.” Rather than disappoint its own
efforts at liberal multiculturalism, it points to the political impotence of identity
politics—in which political activity is organized around the interests of particular
groups that are united on the basis of a shared social identity such as race, ethnicity,
religion, gender, or sexual orientation, rather than around policy issues or class.
And thus, it refuses the consolation of a political alliance of oppressed, politicized
identities joined by a “chain of equivalences.”
In one scene that closely follows All that Heaven Allows, Cathy and Raymond
are talking outside of her house. Raymond tells Cathy three important things
about himself that unsettle her expectations: 1) he is a responsible father raising a
daughter alone (“Well I guess between Pa’s business, my shop, and looking after
my little girl, there’s not much time for reflecting”); 2) he owns a plant shop in
town (“It’s just a little place, down on Hawthorne. Started out as a service for gardeners,
ordering plants and fertilizer. Till I opened the store. ’Bout six years ago.
The only thing that business degree’s been good for yet”); and 3) he has a business
degree. This information is close to what Ron Kirby established in his first meeting
with Cary, and amounts to a corrective (as it did in Sirk’s film)—namely, “I am
not what I seem.” When Cathy understands Raymond’s difference to be quite literally
“the color of his skin,” the “friendship” can commence, just as in All that
Heaven Allows where the barrier to Ron and Cary’s relationship is overcome when
Cary learns the “truth” about Ron’s class status (i.e., that he is not a wage worker).
In the remake, racial difference is reduced to its “essential” truth—it depends, in
the last analysis, on “skin color,” not on culture or class. Hence this scene reproduces
the cliché of color blindness that is undermined throughout the film.68
Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 107
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 107
 The cliché of color blindness is primarily undermined in the scene in which
Cathy breaks off her relationship with Raymond.
Cathy: It just isn’t plausible, Raymond, for me to be friends with you. You’ve been so
very kind. To me. And I’ve been perfectly reckless and foolish in return … thinking—
Raymond: What? That one person could reach out to another? Take an interest in
another? And that maybe, for one fleeting instance, could manage to see beyond the
surface—beyond the color of things?
Cathy: Do you think we ever really do? See beyond those things? The surface of
things?
Raymond: “Just beyond that fall of grace/Behold that shining place.” Yes, I do. I don’t
really have a choice. 
Cathy: I wish I could … You’re so beautiful.
Raymond advances the cliché of color blindness (managing “to see beyond the surface”)
that has determined Cathy’s actions until now, only to have Cathy, in good
postmodern fashion, suddenly refuse this opposition of depth and surface, essence
and appearance, declaring, instead, the reign of appearance.69 This disavowal of
depth mirrors the film’s own disavowal of what some have argued is the film’s
“archeological” project of recuperating the actual fifties buried beneath the glossy
images of its own representations. The scene discussed above would suggest the
film’s acknowledgement of the impossibility of such a project—in other words,
the impossibility of archeology, of getting at the “actual” fifties, of recuperating the
past itself.70
While Far from Heaven may have little use for a specific black consciousness,
it does have a political understanding of race. When Cathy tells Raymond on a
public street that there is no seeing beyond the surface of things, a white man from
across the street interrupts: “You! Boy! Hands off!” The seriousness of the surface
of things is thus underlined. And it is the surface of things that will ultimately
determine Raymond’s fate. To say that there is nothing “beyond” the surface of
things is not to retreat to superficiality.71
This moment of interpellation—“You! Boy! Hands off !”—is an illustration of
what in Black Skin, White Mask, Frantz Fanon calls the “fact of blackness.”72
Fanon rejects a conception of black subjectivity in which it is either a mere means
to class consciousness (as one finds in Sartre) or an expression of a shared history
or culture (as one finds in negritude). Instead, Fanon posits a black consciousness
based in experience. The “fact of blackness” is a moment of interpellation—a
child saying to his mother, “Look, a Negro!” Fanon complains: “Jean-Paul Sartre
had forgotten that the Negro suffers in his body quite differently than the white
man.”73 And so, in Fanon, “the regime of the look” is installed at the heart of the
race problematic:
All the same, the Jew can be unknown in his Jewishness. He is not wholly what he is.
One hopes, one waits. His actions, his behavior are the final determinant. He is a
white man, and, apart from some very debatable characteristics, he can sometimes
go unnoticed. He belongs to the race of those who since the beginning of time have
108 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 108
 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 109
never known cannibalism. What an idea, to eat one’s father! Granted, the Jews are
harassed—what am I thinking of? They are hunted down, exterminated, cremated.
But these are little family quarrels. The Jew is disliked from the moment he is tracked
down. But in my case everything takes on a new guise. I am given no chance. I am
overdetermined from without. I am the slave not of the ‘idea’ that others have of me
but of my own appearance.74
Far from Heaven draws a similar distinction in its representation of the hypervisibility
of Raymond (a racialized subject) and the relative invisibility of Frank. The
idea of being a slave of one’s own appearance is present in the film’s view that
surface—appearance, the visible—is indispensable for any account of racism. To
be discriminated against on the basis of appearance is not an incidental feature of
racism; it is the heart of the matter.
In its juxtaposition of racism and homosexuality, Far from Heaven shows how
much Raymond’s hypervisibility impacts his prospects for economic mobility and
love. Willis observes: “While Frank is expelled from his family and from heteronormativity,
and Cathy is expelled from suburban wifely normalcy, neither ends
up as bereft as Raymond. He is literally pushed off the film’s map, and off his
own map as well, since, by his account, he has never even been to Baltimore.”75
Raymond’s status as a petit-bourgeois business owner is untenable. The difference
that defines him—hypervisibility—fares worse in the world than the invisibility
of the closet.76 Frank, at least, can maintain his executive job with the television
corporation. It may be true that Frank is exiled—airbrushed from the image of
domestic normativity peddled by Magnatech—yet still, his livelihood is not jeopardized
by his identity (as Raymond’s is). With these differing fates, the absent
term “class” makes its appearance: while Frank continues to be identified with the
corporate giant Magnatech, it is suggested that Raymond, expelled from the petitbourgeois
class, must begin to sell his labor power for wages in Baltimore. The op-
pression that Raymond is shown to suffer is, in the film’s last analysis, economic.
In Far from Heaven, the three identity categories—race, gender, sexuality—
so clearly designated by the film’s structure, ultimately fail to come together in a
“rainbow coalition.”77 By film’s end, the characters representing these categories,
which today are the politicized identities of identity politics, each go their separate
ways and suffer different fates alone. I have been arguing that by calling attention
to the differences in the fates of these characters, the film undermines the view
that, beneath it all, there is a common interest among these identities, that there
is a “chain of equivalences” that could form the basis of an alliance.78
Like Fassbinder, Haynes takes an anti-identity politics stance, but unlike
Fassbinder, he does not posit the ultimate desirability of an alliance based on a
shared class interest. In contrast to Ali and All that Heaven Allows, Far from
Heaven refuses to name capitalism in its indictment. Far from Heaven’s characters
suffer oppression at the hands of social conventions that belong to a certain period
in American history; they are not shown to be linked to the economic organization
of society. While the film suggests some of the affective dimensions of oppression,
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 109
 it fails to diagnose its sources; and it declines to envision the contours of a
utopian future.
Identity Politics and the Melodramatic Mode. Having considered identity
politics in melodrama, we should also consider the melodrama of identity politics.79
In States of Injury: Freedom, Wendy Brown analyzes the structure of desire
of the politicized identities of identity politics in terms of Nietzsche’s concept of
ressentiment—“the moralizing revenge of the powerless.”80 For politicized identities,
the suffering that is the cause of ressentiment depends upon the exclusion
from liberalism’s universal ideal subject—white, masculine, and middle-class.
Politicized identities gauge their social injury by this ideal’s rights and privileges
(e.g., educational and career opportunities, protection from hate crimes, the possibility
of upward mobility in return for “hard work”).81 So while politicized iden-
tities present themselves as self-affirming, in fact, they depend for their existence
as identities on the very ideal (bourgeois, white, male) whose universality they
must deny, but end up reinscribing. Like Nietzsche’s vengeful slave, politicized
identity deals not in political action, but in a “moralizing politics.” Satisfied with its
moral superiority, politicized identity is committed to nothing but its own powerlessness.82
This is shown by the fact that identity politics fights its battles for the
limited goals of legal rights and social acceptance.83 According to Brown,
When social “hurt” is conveyed to the law for resolution, political ground is ceded to
moral and juridical ground. Social injury … becomes that which is “unacceptable” and
“individually culpable” rather than that which symptomatizes deep political distress in
a culture; injury is thereby rendered intentional and individual, politics is reduced to
punishment, and justice is equated with such punishment on the one hand and with
protection by the courts on the other.84
In Brown’s view, the juridical focus of identity politics precludes a fundamental attack
on capitalism, the structure that is ultimately responsible for social injury.
Linda Williams has suggested that the melodramatic mode is the formal complement
of identity politics.85 Like identity politics, the melodramatic mode speaks
in the moralizing language of social injury, individual blame, and exclusion; it demands
rights and recognition from the state and its citizenry. In melodrama, as in
identity politics, virtue is equated with suffering; and victims, because they are victims,
occupy the moral high ground.86 Moreover, the melodramatic mode and
identity politics are both predictable by-products of liberalism.
It is no surprise, then, that Far from Heaven should distance itself from the
melodramatic mode as much as it does from identity politics. Most critics have
taken for granted that Far from Heaven is unproblematically a melodrama, citing
the emotion it reliably engenders in its viewers.87 But we must think carefully
about the film’s relation to the melodramatic mode. Christine Gledhill has emphasized
that in order for the melodramatic mode to deliver moral legibility in a post-
sacred world, it also “must conform to realism’s ever shifting criteria of relevance
and credibility, for it has power only on the premises of a recognizable, socially
110 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 110
 constructed world.”88 And, “As the terms of the world shift so must the recognition
of its changing audiences be continually resolicited.”89
Melodrama draws on realism in two ways. First, melodrama employs the
filmic conventions that, at a given historical moment, look like realism. The second
way in which melodrama draws on realism is by adjusting to the shifting signs
of what Gledhill prefers to call “cultural verisimilitude,” or, roughly, contemporary
public opinion on cultural and social issues, the reigning consensus on “reality.”90
In order to maintain this cultural verisimilitude in the face of an audience’s
changing experience of its situation, melodrama must adapt itself to the new consensus.
It must present a constellation of moral dilemmas that the audience ac-
cepts as relevant to its own situation. So understood, melodrama is a peculiarly
contemporary form, not because its narratives are always set in the present (they
often are not), but because of “the genuine turmoil and timeliness of the issues it
takes up,”91 and because of the currency of the filmic conventions it employs.
If we take seriously the account of melodrama put forward by Williams and
Gledhill, we are forced to conclude that Far from Heaven is not straightforwardly
a melodrama: it does not deliver moral legibility precisely because it does not draw
on realism in the ways discussed above. First, it does not update its use of filmic
conventions: even acting styles and scripts mimic the conventions of the past. More
importantly, it lacks cultural verisimilitude. In its treatment of social issues—
segregation, the taboo on interracial relationships, the isolation of the stay-athome
mother, a medical establishment that treats homosexuality as a disease—it
fails to be timely. This is not merely because the film is set in the past and its
discourse has been scrupulously designed to imitate 1950s styles of filmmaking.
Certainly, there is a long tradition of historical melodramas that provide timely
Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 111
Figure 6. “Over-determination from without”: An empty pool evacuated
after a black child has touched the water in Todd Haynes’s Far from
Heaven (Focus Features, 2002).
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 111
 moral lessons. Rather, Far from Heaven’s untimeliness owes to the fact that its
moral lessons—its clichéd brand of antiracism, its injunctions to tolerance and inclusion
of “others”—belong to the past as well. That was a time when the United
States was, in the words of George Fredrickson, an “overtly racist regime,”92 when
the battles for rights and recognition from the state was a live one, when discrimination
by individuals looked like both cause and effect of social inequality and
injustice, when legal segregation was the paradigmatic form of intolerance. The
public consensus on these issues has undeniably shifted, although we may still feel
dissatisfied with the current state of things.
If, as I have suggested, the source of affect in Far from Heaven cannot be attributed
to melodrama, then how do we account for it? Attempting to reconcile
pastiche and emotion, Richard Dyer’s meditations on the source of the film’s affect
are revealing:
Some of the intensity of the emotional response to the film feels like a longing for
there to be such films and a gratitude for having given us one now in which some of
the elements we may stumble over in them (because of changing attitudes and tastes)
have been dealt with, but then, just because of the differences, an intensification of
regret that such films are not made. What happens in the film is sad but we may also
be sad for there not being films that do sadness like this anymore.93
What is it about this way of “doing sadness” that is so compelling? What is it about
such films?
We may begin to address these questions by noting the strange social predicament
in which we find ourselves: we know that inequality exists—that the
dilemma of race, for example, continues in the American present—while grasping
the inadequacy of representing its contemporary forms in the way it has been
112 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
Figure 7. Neither black nor white: Cathy’s new, ethnically ambiguous gardener
in Todd Haynes’s Far from Heaven (Focus Features, 2002).
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 112
 represented in the past (i.e., melodramatically). The strangeness of this predicament
has led some critics to read the film as condescending to the shameful past
and basking in the present’s moral superiority.94 Such a reading registers the untimeliness
of the social issues presented in the film, but attributes that untimeli-
ness to arrogance, thus unwittingly assuming the progressive unfolding of history.95
Instead, I am suggesting that the combination of the untimely representation of
the moralistic dimensions of bias, on the one hand, and the inarticulate sense that
all is not well in the present, on the other hand, points to the difficulty of understanding
and representing contemporary forms of social injustice, and particularly
racism. In that case, perhaps the source of Far from Heaven’s affect is nostalgia—
not nostalgia for the 1950s per se or for, as Dyer would have it, the films of that
period, but rather, for the moral clarity of a time when unpleasant social realities
seemed visible, on the surface of things, and in clear violation of the explicit ideals
of American democracy. It is nostalgia for the moral righteousness of the fight for
civil and political rights that characterized the era of widespread, socially sanctioned
exclusion. In effect, it is nostalgia for a melodramatic approach to social
injustice.
Far from Heaven thus forces us to confront the question of whether the
melodramatic mode is able to represent the social ills of the present historical
conjuncture—ills to which, in the language of Wendy Brown, a “moral and juridical”
framework seems increasingly inadequate. Is, for instance, the racial melo-
drama still capable of delivering moral legibility, when legal segregation has been
outlawed, and when explicit social exclusion is universally deemed unacceptable?
How does one represent racism melodramatically when racism has shed its melodramatic
skin? In other words, I am suggesting that Far from Heaven is a film that
points to a very political problem that concerns Jameson—namely, fashioning representations
of the present.
Conclusion. We are now in a position to take the full measure of Far from
Heaven’s contemporaneity. On the one hand, by setting the narrative in the same
time and place as Sirk’s original, and by copying its aesthetics, Far from Heaven
calls attention to the adjustments it makes to the narrative of All that Heaven Allows.
The contemporary content of Far from Heaven is expressed in the asymme-
try of the lives of Frank and Raymond—an asymmetry that invites a consideration
of the political possibilities of identity politics. It is the film’s structural approach,
its juxtaposition of the characters’ lives, that engenders a politically incorrect comparison
of their suffering. On the other hand, if we consider the characters’ situa-
tions not in relation to each other, but in relation to the community’s censure, we
are struck by the film’s dated and moralistic representation of social exclusion. Far
from Heaven’s approach to prejudice both registers what is satisfying in the moral
clarity of melodramatic representations of injustice, and it suggests the need for a
new mode of representation, one that is better suited to contemporary forms of
oppression.
Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 113
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 113
 The latter interest in changing forms of social injustice was prefigured in Ali:
Fear Eats the Soul. The form of social injustice depicted in the first part of Ali is
explicitly exclusionary, like that of All that Heaven Allows and Far from Heaven.
But in the second part of Ali, where the first part is remade, racism transforms into
an opportunistic appropriation of the “other.” Fassbinder identifies the source and
unity of these changing forms: it is capitalist society. For its part, Far from Heaven
recognizes that the social ills of society take on distinct forms at different historical
moments, but declines to characterize the peculiar forms of the present. Nor
does it give an account of what, at bottom, ails its suffering characters. Far from
Heaven thus seems to be a film without hope. In Ali: Fear East the Soul, hope depends
on the recognition of the shared interests of workers of different races and
ethnicities. In All that Heaven Allows, hope resides in the pastoral vision of a simple
commodity-producing society. But Far from Heaven is mired in the nowhere
place of “left melancholy”—nostalgic for the galvanizing moral outrage of an activist
past, but unable to mount a political strategy for the present, not even in the
realm of imagination.96
Notes
1. See, for instance, Sharon Willis, “The Politics of Disappointment: Todd Haynes
Rewrites Douglas Sirk,” Camera Obscura 54 (18), no. 3 (2003); Robert Sklar, “Far
from Heaven (film),” Cineaste 28, no. 2 (Spring 2003); Amy Taubin, “In Every Dream
Home,” Film Comment 38, no. 5 (September–October 2002).
2. See James Harvey, “Made in Heaven,” Film Comment 39, no. 2 (March–April 2003).
3. Fredric Jameson, Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (Durham,
NC: Duke University Press, 1991), 19.
4. Ibid., 284.
5. Ibid.
6. See Anne Friedberg’s “Les Flaneurs du mal(l): Cinema and the Postmodern Condition,”
Publication of the Modern Language Association 106, no. 3 (1991), for a critique
of Jameson’s taxonomy.
7. Fredric Jameson, “Postmodernism and Consumer Society,” in The Anti-Aesthetic: Essays
on Postmodern Culture, ed. Hal Foster (New York: New Press, 1998), 133.
8. Jameson, “Postmodernism and Consumer Society,” 131.
9. Jameson, Postmodernism, 19.
10. Ibid., 134.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid., 21.
13. Ibid., 284.
14. Pam Cook, in Screening the Past: Memory and Nostalgia in Cinema (London: Routledge,
2005), considers Far from Heaven to be a “nostalgic memory film” which is
defined by the way it “reconstructs an idealized past as a site of pleasurable contemplation
and yearning” (Screening the Past, 4). But for Cook, unlike for Jameson, nos-
talgia, understood as a yearning for that which is lost forever, is not inherently
reactionary: “it can be perceived as a way of coming to terms with the past, as enabling
it to be exorcised in order that society, and individuals, can move on” (Screening the
Past, 4).
114 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 114
 15. Some commentators argue that Far from Heaven is not a remake at all. See Cook,
Screening the Past, and Laura Mulvey, “Review,” Sight and Sound 13, no. 3: 40–41.
16. Thomas Leitch, “Twice-Told Tales: Disavowal and the Rhetoric of the Remake,” in
Dead Ringers: The Remake in Theory and Practice, ed. Jennifer Forrest and Leonard
Koos (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2002). See also Michael Druxman,
Make it Again Sam: A Survey of Movie Remakes (Cranbury, NJ: A. S. Barnes, 1975),
and Harvey Roy Greenberg, “Raiders of the Lost Text: Remaking as Contested
Homage in Always,” in Play it Again, Sam: Retakes on Remakes, ed. Andrew Horton
and Stuart Y. McDougal (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991), for competing
taxonomies. I discuss only Leitch because his taxonomy is most attuned to the
temporal dimension (i.e., to the significance of updating or not), which I think is key
to making sense of these films. See Constantine Verevis, Film Remakes (Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 2006), for an assessment of these approaches and the
taxonomic enterprise in general.
17. Thomas Leitch, “Twice-Told Tales: The Rhetoric of the Remake,” Film and Literature
Quarterly 18, no. 3: 144.
18. Ibid., 145.
19. In Film Remakes, Constantine Verevis categorizes both Far from Heaven and Ali:
Fear Eats the Soul as homages. It seems quite clear that Ali does not imagine itself to
be a secondary text at all, but one that attempts to apply certain of Sirk’s insights to
Fassbinder’s own, more radical project. It is more plausible to claim that Far from
Heaven is an homage; but, as I hope to demonstrate, Haynes’s film is less recuperative
and historical and more generative and contemporary.
20. Ibid., 53.
21. Ibid., 52.
22. Ibid., 53.
23. Even Verevis, who is skeptical about “purely textual descriptions of the remake, particularly
those which seek to ground the category in a rigid distinction between an origi-
nal story and its new discursive incarnation” (Film Remakes, 28), thinks that the
repetition of narrative units in the remake “most often … relate to the content …
rather than to the form … of the film” (Film Remakes, 21). He mentions Far from
Heaven as a rare example of the way such talk (of story and discourse) can be “frustrated
by those remakes which repeat not only the narrative invention of an original
property but seek … to recreate the expressive design of an earlier film” (Film Remakes,
28). I would only add that the uncommonness of this kind of repetition requires
special attention.
24. Willis, “The Politics of Disappointment,” 135.
25. Pam Cook has expressed a similar view. Cook writes: “Todd Haynes’ probing beneath
the surfaces of Sirk’s melodramas reveals a hidden American history” (Screening the
Past, 15).
26. Jameson, “Postmodernism and Consumer Society,” 135.
27. See Chuck Kleinhans, “Notes on Melodrama and the Family under Capitalism,” Film
Reader, no. 3 (1978), for more on the relation between the age and class conflict in
the film. See Michael E. Selig, “Contradiction and Reading: Social Class in Imitation
of Life,” Wide Angle 10, no. 4: 14–22, for an assessment of the relation between the
conflicts of social class and “sex class” in Sirk films. See Barbara Klinger, Melodrama
and Meaning: History, Culture, and the Films of Douglas Sirk (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1994), for a historical review of the auteurist orientation of Sirk’s
criticism and for a critical assessment of scholarly close reading as a Film Studies
methodology.
Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 115
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 115
 28. The misrecognition of the community is most obviously manifested in the language
that is used to discuss Ron’s vocation: he is repeatedly referred to as a “gardener.”
When Sara, Cary’s best friend, learns of the affair, she asks incredulously: “You can’t
be serious. Your gardener?” The high-society cocktail partygoers similarly inquire, “A
gardener?” to which another replies, “Why doesn’t he find himself a better moneymaking
vocation?” Even Cary’s son, Ned, before he meets Ron, is disturbed by his
mother’s impending marriage to “old Kirby, the gardener[’s]” son, to which Cary
replies, “You don’t know him.” Ned answers, “We know the type.”
29. Linda Williams, “Melodrama Revisited,” in Refiguring American Film Genres: History
and Theory, ed. Nick Browne (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998), 8.
Williams adapts Peter Brooks’s treatment of the melodramatic mode in literature to
film. See Brooks’s The Melodramatic Imagination: Balzac, Henry James, Melodrama,
and the Mode of Excess (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1976).
30. Perhaps it could be argued that Cary is also a victim-hero. After all, like Ron, her selfsacrifice
goes unrecognized by her children and results indirectly in her headache
symptoms. But I would add that to the degree that she comes to share Ron’s ethical
principles, her virtue multiplies in our eyes. If her love object were a scoundrel, would
the breakup seem like such a self-sacrificing act? In other words, our perception of her
victimization depends on our reading of Ron.
31. It is often the case in melodrama that virtue is shown by suffering. In Playing the Race
Card: Melodramas of Black and White from Uncle Tom to O. J. Simpson (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001), Linda Williams has persuasively argued that in
melodrama, victimization and suffering count as proof of virtue “for if virtue is not obvious,
suffering … is.” Williams, Playing the Race Card, 29. My point is only that Ron
is an exception to this rule. His virtue is demonstrated not so much by suffering (although
he is shown to suffer at the hands of the Stoningham elite) as by deeds, freely
chosen actions, which could only have been undertaken by a man in Ron’s position.
32. Jon Halliday, in Douglas Sirk, ed. Laura Mulvey and Jon Halliday (Edinburgh Film
Festival, 1972), 61; (italics in the original).
33. Ibid.
34. Ibid.
35. It must be admitted that if Cary and Ron share the same ideals, they probably have a
different assessment of how to behave in light of the gulf between “real life” and the
ideal. For Ron, the ethical point of view dictates that one should act as if the “real
world” were the ideal world; for Cary, to do so is hopelessly utopian. The conflict is not
over what the “good” values are, but the conditions of possibility for the pursuit of
those values.
36. Much of the critical literature around Sirk has focused on style, particularly his use of
an “ironic mise-en-scène.” It is worth noting that while scholars agree on the fact of stylization
in the mise-en-scène, there is some disagreement on its effect and implications.
Paul Willemen, for example, has said of Sirk’s work that “It is extremely difficult to
make any clear cut and precise distinction between stylization and parody.” Willemen,
“Distanciation and Douglas Sirk,” in Douglas Sirk, ed. Laura Mulvey and Jon Halliday
(Edinburgh Film Festival: 1972), 28. Elsewhere, Willemen has lamented the sophisticated
viewer that misreads Sirk’s films by “turning it into camp,” a danger connected
with an overinvestment in parodic readings of stylization. Paul Willemen, “Towards an
Analysis of the Sirkian System,” Screen 13, no. 4: 133. See Lauren Berlant’s “National
Brands/National Bodies: Imitation of Life,” in The Phantom Public Sphere, ed. Bruce
Robbins (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1993) for a critical assessment
of the use of stylization in the funeral scene featuring Mahalia Jackson in Imitation
of Life.
116 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 116
 37. See John Mercer and Martin Shingler’s Melodrama: Genre, Style, Sensibility (New
York: Wallflower Press, 2004) and Thomas Schatz’s Hollywood Genres: Formulas,
Filmmaking, and the Studio System (New York: Random House, 1981) for this view.
Mercer and Shingler grant that “From the opening scene of the film Ron is symbolically
linked to a typically clichéd notion of nature” but agree with Schatz that the
clichéd representation functions to highlight the way in which Ron’s “alternative
lifestyle” is not much better than the one Cary has fled. After all, “Ron … seemingly
free thinking, still adopts a paternalistic attitude toward Cary, forcing her to choose between
the life and security that she has known or his ‘new’ way of living.” Mercer and
Shingler, Melodrama, 67. Thus, by the film’s end, the pathos of the false happy ending
owes to the continuation (in a new guise) of Cary’s oppression by patriarchy.
38. One could object that the mise-en-scène of Cary’s world is similarly artificial. The difference
is that in the case of her world, the style is consistent with the narrative:
Cary’s people are as inauthentic and contrived as the representation of the spaces they
inhabit.
39. Linda Hutcheon—trying to understand why postmodern artifacts can be simultaneously
deemed, by different critics, as both ironic and nostalgic—argues that nostalgia
and irony have gone hand in hand for a long time. Her point is that both irony and nostalgia
(contrary to the Jamesonian view that casts nostalgia, but not irony, as always an
obstacle to “genuine politics”) are “transideological,” that is, they “can be made to ‘happen’
by (and to) anyone of any political persuasion”: nostalgia was a feature of fascism
and negritude. (One could object that negritude too was ideologically problematic.) In
Hutcheon’s view, this is the case because “to call something ironic or nostalgic is, in
fact, less a description of the ENTITY ITSELF than an attribution of a quality of
RESPONSE.” Hutcheon, “Irony, Nostalgia, and the Postmodern” (1998), http://www
.library.utoronto.ca/utel/criticism/hutchinp.html. Based on the same textual evidence—
the contrived representation of nature—I think one could derive both readings proposed
above.
40. Hutcheon, “Irony, Nostalgia, and the Postmodern,” par. 8.
41. Williams, Playing the Race Card, 28.
42. Hutcheon, “Irony, Nostalgia, and the Postmodern,” par. 9.
43. According to Williams, “A melodrama does not have to contain multiple scenes of pathetic
death to function melodramatically. What counts is the feeling of loss suffused
throughout the form. Audiences may weep or not weep, but the sense of a loss that implicates
readers or audiences is central. And with this feeling of ‘too late,’ which Peter
Brooks has explained as the longing for a fullness of being of an earlier, still-sacred universe,
time and timing become all important.” Williams, “Melodrama Revisited,” 18.
44. In interviews with Jon Halliday, Sirk has admitted that although he did not remember
much about All that Heaven Allows, “I do recall the following influences on me … One
of the first of all American literary impacts on my thinking, when I was thirteen or fourteen,
was a book my father gave me: Walden by Thoreau. This is ultimately what the
film was about—but no one recognized it, except the head of the studio, Mr. Muhl …
The picture is about the antithesis of Thoreau’s qualified Rousseauism and established
American society.” Halliday, Sirk on Sirk: Conversations with Jon Halliday (London:
Faber and Faber, 1971), 113–14.
45. Lance Newman, “Thoreau’s Natural Community and Utopian Socialism,” American
Literature 75, no. 3 (September 2003): 515–44.
46. Ibid.
47. Ibid.
48. Ibid., 517. Leo Marx in The Machine in the Garden: Technology and the Pastoral Ideal
in America (London: Oxford University Press, 1964) has emphasized the importance of
Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 117
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 117
 craft and art to this transformation. He has read the emphasis on self-transformation
not so much as an intermediate step in the transformation of society as it is itself
compensatory.
49. According to Leo Marx, “It is not the material or social conditions of life, it is not capitalism,
that in his [Thoreau’s] view accounts for the quiet desperation felt by the mass
of men: it is their own spiritual inertia.” Quoted in Newman, “Thoreau’s Natural Community,”
17.
50. Ibid., 10.
51. The fisherman’s accent in English sounds more like that of a native speaker of Italian
than of Spanish, but his wife unmistakably speaks a few words in Spanish: “Que bonita
[of Cary]. Tanto gusto. Mi hija, Margarita.” Some scholars, such as Judith Mayne, have
thought them to be Italian. See Judith Mayne, “Fassbinder and Spectatorship,” New
German Critique 12 (Fall 1977): 69.
52. It is worth noting that there was a sharp rise in Latino immigration, particularly Mexican
immigration, to the United States during the 1950s as a result of the new demand
for immigrant labor following World War II. Bracero programs, in effect from
1942–47 and from 1951–64, brought Mexican laborers to do seasonal agricultural
work in the United States.
53. The German title is Angst essen Seele auf, which means, roughly, “fear eats the soul.”
In German, this line is ungrammatical, presumably trying to mimic the speech of a
nonnative speaker of German. The U.S. title is “Ali: Fear Eats the Soul.” This may reflect
the working title of the film, which was “Alle Türken heißen Ali” (“All Turks are
Named Ali”). Most scholars writing in English refer to the film as “Fear Eats the Soul,”
which has the disadvantage of not reflecting the grammatical error. I will refer to it
here by the U.S. title, which is not a perfect solution either, but has the advantage of
suggesting the way the name and character of “Ali” function allegorically in the film.
54. I recognize that “guest worker” (gastarbeiter in German) is a contested term used to
refer to the hundreds of thousands of foreign workers recruited by the Federal Republic
of Germany during the so-called economic miracle following World War II. The ob-
vious irony of this misnomer is that guests, by definition, do not work for their hosts.
See Rita C. K. Chin, “Imagining a German Multiculturalism: Aras Ören and the
Contested Meanings of the ‘Guest Worker,’ 1955–1980,” Radical History Review 83
(2002): 53. Hereafter, I will be using this term without quotations, though in some
sense I mean them.
55. Another example of this emphasis on the economic may be seen in the drama of the
new Yugoslav worker at Emmi’s job. Emmi’s coworkers exclude this new worker from
their wage negotiations because they worry she will jeopardize their chances at a raise.
56. In light of this, it is interesting that Ali: Fear Eats the Soul ’s working title was “Alle
Türken heißen Ali” (“All Turks are Named Ali”), suggesting that 1) Ali’s experience is
generalizable; and 2) Turks are in effect both “auslander” (foreigners) and “schwarz”
(black). Relevant as well is the fact that Ali is North African and not Turkish, while in
1973, the top three guest-worker nationalities, in order, were Turkish, Italian, and
Yugoslav. If one of the film’s objectives is to generalize Ali’s experience, why not make
Ali typical rather than exceptional? Why invite the confusion of race with nationality?
This complexity is precisely what is on display when the characters interchange “foreigner”
and “black” in their discourse.
57. The ulcer, and even the doctor’s prognosis, come straight out of Frantz Fanon’s
Wretched of the Earth. In the chapter on “Colonial War and Mental Disorders,” Fanon
understands the prevalence of the stomach ulcer in Algerian men in similarly social
terms, as a disorder broadly caused by the “pathology of atmosphere” that accompanied
the Algerian war. Frantz Fanon, Wretched of the Earth, trans. Constance Farring-
ton (New York: Grove Press, 1963), 291.
118 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 118
 58. Thomas Elsaesser, Fassbinder’s Germany: History, Identity, Subject (Amsterdam: Amsterdam
University Press, 1996), 30.
59. Ibid., 29.
60. Ibid.
61. Ibid., 40.
62. In “Reading Fassbinder’s Sexual Politics,” chap. 12 of Culture of Queers (London:
Routledge, 2002), Richard Dyer has argued that several of Fassbinder’s films (including
Ali) exemplify a problematic political perspective, what Walter Benjamin called
“left-wing melancholy.” This term refers to a quietist leftist stance characterized by
both a recognition of the desolation of capitalism and a refusal of the real world possibilities
of collectivity, political mobilization, and social transformation. For Dyer,
left-wing melancholy “does not see the working class as the agent of historical
change—instead it stresses the working class as the victim of capitalist society and/or
as hopelessly complicit in its own oppression.” Dyer, “Reading Fassbinder’s Sexual Politics,”
177. Surely the working class can be a victim of capitalist society, complicit in its
own oppression, and also the agent of historical change. What is certainly the case in
Fassbinder is that successful political action is not depicted. But in Ali, there is a clearly
marked class solidarity that is decidedly not a politics of identity.
63. Willis, “The Politics of Disappointment,” 162.
64. Ibid., 168.
65. Ibid., 158.
66. Ibid., 169.
67. See James Morrison, “Introduction,” in The Cinema of Todd Haynes: All that Heaven
Allows, ed. Morrison (London: Wallflower, 2007), for a similar stance. By contrast,
Laura Mulvey, “Review,” Sight and Sound 13, no. 3 (2003): 40–41, takes the view that
the film is pointing to a disanalogy: “At first Far from Heaven might seem to suggest
that these two social oppressions [racism and homophobia] are equal and parallel in intensity,
but as the plot unfolds social anxiety at homosexuality is shown to be infinitely
less deep rooted than the hysteria caused by intimacy across the racial divide.” Mulvey,
“Review,” 41.
68. The cliché is reinforced by the casting of Dennis Haysbert as Raymond. Haysbert
played Clay Arlington in the 1993 black-and-white thriller-allegory of American race
relations, Suture (Siegel and McGhee). In the film’s diegesis, Haysbert is the identical
half-brother of white actor Michael Harris. Within the film’s diegesis, the two are supposed
to look identical. Of course, from the spectator’s perspective, they could not look
more different: the one is black, tall, and strong, the other is white and scrawny. See
Marcia Landy, “Storytelling and Information in Todd Haynes’ Films,” in The Cinema
of Todd Haynes, for a thorough treatment of the use of cliché in Haynes’s oeuvre.
69. Fredric Jameson (1991) considers this new “depthlessness” a symptom of 
postmodernism.
70. In “The Filmmaker’s Experience: Question and Answer with Todd Haynes and 
Julianne Moore” (included in the DVD supplemental materials), Haynes says that
many people have asked directly if the “message” of his movie is summed up by 
Raymond’s line about getting beneath the surface of things, to which he has replied,
“It’s the contrary. Everything in this film is on the surface.”
71. For an alternative account of “surface” in the film, see Celeste-Marie Bernier, “Beyond
the Surface of Things: Race, Representation and the Fine Arts in Far from Heaven,”
in The Cinema of Todd Haynes.
72. Frantz Fanon, Black Skin, White Masks, trans. Charles Lam Markmann (New York:
Grove, 1991).
73. Ibid., 138.
74. Ibid., 115.
Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 119
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 119
 75. Willis, “Politics of Disappointment,” 168.
76. The film also suggests the life possibilities of gay characters that are out of the closet.
An example of this would be the inclusion of Mona Lauder’s uncle, Morris Farnsworth,
“the hotshot art dealer from New York,” who snickers, with the socialites, at Cathy
and Raymond in the art gallery scene. He is explicitly designated a gay character.
Farnsworth is out of the closet, embraced by the group, and sees no common cause
with Raymond.
77. And perhaps to this failed coalition we can add the figure of the Latino immigrant.
There is an anomalous moment at the end of the film that depicts a new gardener at
work in Cathy’s yard. For a few frames, we can see that this gardener is neither black
nor white; he has a long ponytail of straight, black hair and could be Latino, evoking
ongoing “conflicts” between immigrants (mainly from Latin America) and African
Americans around employment displacement and competition for low-wage jobs—yet
another reminder of a highly fractured “rainbow coalition.”
78. I use this phrase in the way that Slavoj Žižek does in his convincing critique of multiculturalism
and the arguments of Laclau and Mouffe (Hegemony and Socialist Strat-
egy) in “Multiculturalism, Or, the Cultural Logic of Multinational Capitalism” (New
Left Review, September–October 1997). For other critiques of identity politics, see
also Jameson (1991), E. San Juan Jr. (2002), Hardt and Negri (2001), Wendy Brown
(1995, 2006), Adolph Reed Jr. (1999), and Walter Benn Michaels (2006).
79. See also Lauren Berlant, “The Subject of True Feeling: Pain, Privacy, and Politics,” in
Cultural Studies and Political Theory, ed. Jodi Dean (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 2000).
80. Wendy Brown, States of Injury: Power and Freedom in Late Modernity (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1995), 68.
81. Ibid., 59.
82. Ibid.
83. Ibid., 60.
84. Ibid., 27.
85. Williams, Playing the Race Card, 24, 43.
86. For this account of melodrama, see Brooks, The Melodramatic Imagination; Williams,
Playing the Race Card; and Christine Gledhill, ed., Home Is Where the Heart Is: Studies
in Melodrama and the Woman’s Picture (London: BFI Publishing, 1987).
87. See, for example, Amy Taubin, “In Every Dream Home,” Film Comment 38, no. 5
(September–October 2002); Richard Falcon, Sight and Sound 13, no. 3 (2003); and
Richard Dyer, Pastiche (London: Routledge, 2007).
88. Christine Gledhill, “The Melodramatic Field,” in Gledhill, Home Is Where the Heart
Is, 37.
89. Ibid.
90. Christine Gledhill, “Rethinking Genre,” in Reinventing Film Studies, ed. Christine
Gledhill and Linda Williams (London: Arnold, 2000), 236. “Cultural verisimilitude”
was coined by Todorov and applied to film by Steve Neale. For Neale, “verisimilitude”
should not be used as a synonym for “realism” or “authenticity,” as he accuses Gledhill
of doing, because according to Todorov, “the verisimilar is not a relation between discourse
and its referent (the relation to truth), but between discourse and what readers
believe is true” (118–19). See Neale, “Questions of Genre,” Screen 31, no. 1 (Spring
1990), and Tzvetan Todorov, The Poetics of Prose (Oxford: Blackwell, 1977).
91. Williams, Playing the Race Card, 18.
92. In Racism: A Short History (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2002),
Fredrickson considers the ideal type of the “overtly racist regime” to have been exemplified
by the American South at the height of Jim Crow, in South Africa during
apartheid, and in Nazi Germany.
120 Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 120
 93. Dyer, Pastiche, 178.
94. James Harvey wrote in Film Comment, “But it’s the movie’s condescension toward the
past—unintended but unmistakable—that’s most troublesome … And in spite of a
general level of intelligence and restraint, it goes on feeling that way—an enlightened
movie about unenlightened people living in a ludicrous time … If we (or our predecessors)
were so dumb then, should we be feeling so good about today—watching this
movie?” Harvey, “Made in Heaven,” 55.
95. Pam Cook has argued that, in fact, Far from Heaven is questioning “linear progression,
and the way we think of social progress and history.” Cook, Screening the Past, 16.
And certainly Todd Haynes takes himself to be rejecting progressivist models of 
history: “When most people see films set in the ’50’s today … there’s an immediate
sense of superiority. It’s all about the myth that as time moves on, we become more
progressive … So the ’50’s become a sort of earmark of oppressive politics and climate,
which is flattering to us as we look back.” Quoted in Geoffrey O’Brien, “Past Perfect,”
Artforum International 41, no. 3 (November 2002): 152–57.
96. See Wendy Brown, “Resisting Left Melancholy,” Boundary 2 26, no. 3 (1999): 19–27;
see also Dyer, “Reading Fassbinder’s Sexual Politics,” for a critique of Fassbinder’s succumbing
to left melancholy.
Cinema Journal 47, No. 3, Spring 2008 121
Skvirsky.qxp  3/26/08  4:56 PM  Page 121
