Community Enemies Yoked Where are Hester, Arthur, Roger, Henry, Carol, and Will, The village martyr, the weak-willed minister, the lonely opportunist, the agrarian experimenter, the would-be reformist, the practical, hometown doctor? All, all are sleeping now, Dust returned to dust, Ashes to ashes. One caught in shameful adultery, One rankled by a tragic flaw, One who sacrificed his soul to conquer another, One who lived a simple life with nature, One who determined to fulfill her vision, One caught in the status quo, All, all are sleeping now, Peaceful in death if not in life. One an enemy to conformity, One an enemy to himself, One an enemy to God's laws, One an enemy to society's institutions, One an enemy to ugliness and bigotry, One an enemy to social upheaval, Yoked to the community, to the land, To ambitions both thwarted and fulfilled. All, all are sleeping now. Listen to the secrets of the soul. Elizabeth Watson 30 The Examined Life: Family, Community, and Work in American Literature "Members of Each Other": Community in community, which subsumes all smaller and lower forms, is the American Life and Literature concept of the common good—that which benefits all members of the polity. Francois N. Babeuf (Bartlett, 414-15), the French For we must consider that we shall be a city upon a hill. revolutionary activist, formed a Conspiracy of Equals aimed at The eyes of all people are upon us, so that if we shall deal "something more sublime and equitable—the common good, or falsely with our God in this work wehaveundertaken, and the community of goods." so cause him to withdraw his present help from us, we Especially since the American and French revolutions of the shall bemadea story and a byword throughout the world. late eighteenth century, leaders, social philosophers, economists, fro A Model f Christia Charity educational theorists, and others have been necessarily concernedm " o n * (1630), a sermon by John Winthrop with the relationship of the individual to the community, and, Governor of the Massachusetts Bay with the rights and responsibilities of both. Freud (III.287) Colony, delivered aboard the Arbella considered it the chief task of every individual, from the onset of In the ninth book of Homer's Odyssey, Odysseus tells King puberty, to cease to be a child and to become a member of a social Alcinous of community. In the fourteenth chapter of The Moon and Sixpence his adventures among the Cyclops, that race of giants with one huge eye in the center of their foreheads The Cyclops the English novelist William Somerset Maugham defines . ' physical features are not soastonishing to Odysseus as are their conscience as "the guardian in the individual of the rules which social arrangements. They have "neither gatherings forcouncil the community has evolved for its preservation." Maugham's nor oracles of law, but they dwell in hollowcaves on the crests of countryman Bertrand Russell (176) admits the "abstract right of high hills.. and they reck not one ofanother. Without laws or the community to interfere with its members in order to secure . " deliberative gatherings and without concern for one another the biological necessaries to all," but he does not think this right , , the Cyclopsdo not live as members of a community applies to such things as opinion and knowledge. "The fact that . The Greeks found life outside apolis, or city-state uncivilized the majority of a community dislikes an opinion gives it no right , . Aperson wholived to himself like a Cyclops unconcerned about to interfere with those who hold it." , , his fellow man, uninvolved in things affecting the community From the time of the founding fathers, American leaders, , was simply ignorant i.e an idiotes (hence the English idiot") thinkers, and writers, in a tradition derived from our Greco- , . " . Aristotle in his Politics (Barnes 1986) explains: Roman and Judeo-Christian heritage, have pondered the political,, social, economic, and ecological aspects of community. John Every state is a community of some kind, and every for Quincy Adams viewed the community as an aggregation ofcommunity is established with a view to some good; individuals. "Individual liberty is individual power," he wrote in everyone always acts in order to obtain that which they f a letter to James Lloyd on October 1,1822, "and as the power ofthink good. But, i all communities aim at some good, the f a community is a mass of individual powers, the nation whichstate or political community, which is the highest o all, enjoys the most freedom must necessarily be in proportion to its and which embraces all the rest, aims at good in a greater numbers the most powerful nation." In a speech delivered in degree than any other, and at the highest good. 1910, Theodore Roosevelt (687) invoked the concept of the Implicit in Aristotle's concept of the state as the highest form of common good when he said: "Every man holds his property COMMUNITY 31 subject to the general right of the community to regulate its use people of rank. Additionally, "community" denoted a state or to whatever degree the public welfare may require it.* Reversing organized society, especially a relatively small one. It further the assumption implicit in Theodore Roosevelt's view of property referred to the people of a district, as well as (from the sixteenth rights, Aldo Leopold (x), the environmentalist, asks us to consider century on) the quality of holding something in common, as in not only that land may belong to us, as property, individually and expressions such as "community of interests," "community of communally, but that we belong to the land. "We abuse land," goods," and a sense of common identity and characteristics. Since Leopold writes, "because we regard it as a commodity belonging the nineteenth century, "community" has come to mean something to us. When we see land as a community to which we belong, we more immediate and local than "society," with which it was once may begin to use it with love and respect." There are ecological almost synonymous. In the late nineteenth century the sociologist and environmental implications to economist John Kenneth Toennies introduced two German terms to distinguish between Galbraith's observation, in chapter seventeen of The Affluent "community" as something direct, immediate, and local— Society, that "Just as there must be a balance in what a community Gemeinschaft—and an entity felt to be larger and more inclusive, produces, so there must also be a balance in what the community such as a nation state or society—Gesellschaft (Williams, 65-66). consumes." Judge Learned Hand (284) considered a healthy But whether we understand community as something local community as one capable of tolerating dissent, and maintained and immediate, or all-embracing and abstract, we Americans, that a "community is already in the process of dissolution where from our colonial beginnings onward, have been engaged in a each man begins to eye his neighbor as a possible enemy, where series of experiments aimed at discovering a satisfactory non-conformity with the accepted creed, political as well as accommodation between individual and community. American religious, is a mark of disaffection . .. where orthodoxy chokes history is commonly interpreted as "a story of creative tension freedom of dissent.. ."And Franklin D. Roosevelt (781), in his between two impulses, an insistence on a vast scope for fourth and final inaugural address in January 1945, emphasized individualism and a yearning for a sense of community" (Will, the concept of community from the international perspective. 62). These two impulses may be seen in the differing views of "We have learned that we cannot live alone, at peace; that our Thomas Jefferson and John Adams, as they emerge in the well-being is dependent on the well-being of other nations, far correspondence of these two men (Cappon, Vol. 2, 342-43). away. We have learned that we must live as men, and not as Jefferson is optimistic and confident of the ability of citizens to ostriches, nor as dogs in the manger." Alluding to the assertion of elect their leaders, to better themselve through education; Adams, Socrates (who taught Aristotle's teacher, Plato) that he was not on the other hand, is skeptical, not at all certain that human an Athenian or a Greek, but a citizen of the world, Roosevelt beings, by exercising their rational powers, are capable of concluded: "We have learned to be citizens of the world, members determining those most capable of governing, or of bettering of the human community." themselves through education. Jefferson's views and those of The word "community" has been in the English language Alexander Hamilton differed in a similarly sharp manner, with since the fourteenth century, and is understood in a number of Jefferson essentially optimistic, and Hamilton pessimistic, dubious senses. Deriving from the French comunete, and ultimately from of the ability of the people to rule, as Judge Learned Hand (66ff) the Latin communis, meaning "common," the word from its points out. These differing views of human nature and human earliest use referred to the common people as distinguished from capability result in different visions of appropriate government, 32 The Examined Life: Family, Community, and Work in American Literature and therefore are to be associated with our two dominant another of coin; and another of domestic hired service; and political parties. another of the State" (Shapiro, October 30 entry). Thoreau's Many voices, expressing different visions, speak out of our efforts to wake his neighbors up took place in this ferment of New history. Sometimes these voices stress our identity and our rights England reform movements and social experiments. Thoreau as individuals, sometimes our desire and need for community. was a seeker of community no less than many of his fellow New Henry David Thoreau expresses the impulse to individualism Englanders and other fellow Americans. While his stay at Walden when he writes in the conclusion to Walden: "If a man does not Pond might suggest that he wished to withdraw from any keep pace with his companions, perhaps it is because he hears a community, it must be stressed that Thoreau sought not the dififerent drummer." Yet on the eve of the revolution that secured abolition of community, but a better community, one which was Thoreau's opportunity to march to a different drummer, Benjamin a means to greater fulfillment of the individual. Franklin (348) stressed community when he said: "We must all The continent was explored and settled not so much by hang together, or assuredly we shall all hang separately." individuals as by people moving communally. The settlement The earliest colonists came as members of religious was carried out, in large part, by rootless people in search of communities, with the intention of perpetuating those community. Just as colonists crossed the ocean as a community, communities. "From the beginning," Daniel Boorstin (65) writes, settlers crossed the continent in organized groups. As settlement "communities existed here before there were governments to progressed westward, group after group recapitulated the care for public needs or to enforce public duties." Before setting experience of the Mayflower pilgrims, and formed "a kind of foot on land, the men who crossed on the Mayflower signed an Mayflower Compact" for the journey (Boorstin, 66). As towns agreement to create a body politic in which majority rule would sprang up, businessmen became community-makers and decide all questions and issues. This Mayflower Compact can be community leaders (115-16), the Benjamin Franklins of the West seen as a prototype of later efforts by colonists. In 1630 John (123). Eventually communities competed with one another, for Winthrop's sermon, "A Model of Christian Charity," was designation as the state capital, or (as they do today) for the preached on board ship before the members of the Massachusetts location of a business or industry (Boorstin, 162). The colleges Bay Colony debarked, andimplies a deliberate and self-conscious that were established in connection with this westward movement effort to establish a community. and settlement, Boorstin maintains, were actually neither public Boorstin (1) asserts that "America grew in the search for nor private, but a distinctly American community institution community." New Englanders, more so than the people of the (160). Such was, according to Boorstin, the pattern ofcommunity- southern colonies, saw their communities as centers of change. making everywhere in America except in the South. In New Any idea for bettering the community was welcomed, and New England, and later elsewhere in America, things as they were England public life came to be characterized by an abundance of tended to be measured by how they ought to be; whereas in the reform movements (43). In 1840 Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote to South things as they ought to be tended increasingly to be Thomas Carlyle about the many social experiments that had identified with things as they were (212). become fashionable in New England: "Not a reading man but has The difference between the dynamic communities of New a draft of a new community in his waistcoat pocket," Emerson England and the American West, and those of the South are observed. "One man renounces the use of animal food; and explained not only by the South's "peculiar institution," slavery, COMMUNITY 33 but by differences in topography and settlement patterns. A (22) writes in The American Mind, "the American was much distinctive feature of New England life was the town and its given [in the years between 1880 and 1950] to cooperative meetinghouse, where people met as a community to deal with undertakings and to joining... Athousand organizations sprang public affairs. The population of the South was, by comparison, up—organizations to do good, to prosper business, to influence dispersed across the land. People lived in the midst of fields they politics, to recollect the past, to mold the future, to conquer cultivated; the town meetinghouse was not a distinctive feature culture. . . [These organizations were] an effort to give an of the Southern landscape, as in New England (Wertenbaker, 85). appearance of stability to an unstable society, to create order out Yet this is not to say that no sense of community existedin the of disorder, to substitute new loyalties for those which had been South. In the South and border South, where frontier conditions dissipated and new conventions for those which had been lost, to persisted longer than in New England and other parts of the enlarge horizons and inflate opportunities." During these years, country, people lived communally even when they resided at too, mainline American churches shifted from an emphasis on considerable distances from one another, and community mores individual salvation to one of providing for the social needs of the and public opinion operated effectively. community (170-71). The historian Everett Dick, in The Dixie Frontier (302-03), Yet all this evidence of community-building, as Commager provides an illustration: suggests, presented an appearance that belied the reality upon Such was theprimitive simplicity [in frontier communities] which it was founded. Tocqueville (Vol. 2,236) in his Democracy that there locks. The first lock in in America, shrewdly observed, in the first third of the nineteenth were no one community was bought by farmer d ttached to the door f his century, a difficulty with respect to democratic communities. a an a o corn-crib.This aroused such indignation among the whole "Democracy loosens social ties," he wrote, "but it draws the ties ighborhood that ss ting pelled him to of nature more tight; it brings kindred more closely together,ne a ma mee com ve it. Public pinion held that his tion was whilst it places the various members of the community moreremo o ac a reflection upon the honesty f the ighborhood, insult widely apart." o ne an to the whole community. It was freely acknowledged that T. K Whipple (32-33) in Study Out the Land, elaborates on he had aperfeet right to lock things from his own children what Tocqueville condenses into a single proposition. Americans in his house, but to turn a key in the face of the whole were a nation of immigrants from other lands, Whipple reminds community was an affront that would not be brooked. us, and he is interested in the psychology of people uprooted from old European communities and transplanted into the American In the stories we tell ourselves about the American frontier reality. Such a man cannot possibly have the same bond with the and settlement experience, the rugged individualist occupies soil that his ancestors had in the old community. Such a man's life center stage. Far more important than the lone frontiersmen, is necessarily "to some extent impoverished, even though he may however, were "the obscure men and women who tilled the be quite unconscious of the deprivation... He once had a close farms, founded homes, and built ordered communities" (Greene, and vital tie with the world about him, and now he has little or 177). Our impulse to individualism has always existed, and has none, except as a source of livelihood. His treatment of the soil, been pointed out, in tension with an antithetical impulse toward his ruthless exploitation of it, and his willingness to leave it and community. "For all his individualism," Henry Steele Commager move on will be measures of his lack of feeling." 34 The Examined Life: Family, Community, and Work in American Literature Here Whipple describes the same rootlessness and mobility education, abolitionism, and trade unionism through the eras of that Boorstin deals with in The Americans: The National Jackson and Lincoln also expressed a belief in cooperation in Experience, but he is less sanguine about this feature of the preference to untrammeled economic freedom, entrepreneurship, American experience than is Boorstin—at the same time that he and root-hog-or-die competition (Wish, v. 1, 574-75), the actions helps explain why Tocqueville thought democracy loosened social of Americans fell conspicuously short of expressed ideals. We ties and placed members of the community "more widely apart." have too often been "Jefiersonian in talk, Hamiltonian in practice," The transplanted alien, Whipple continues, may settle among as some individuals have received a charter to exploit the public other aliens, "aliens to each other as well as to him; and a number in the name of freedom of enterprise. Economic power has easily of strangers, however friendly and kindly, cannot soon coalesce translated into political power. A way of life and a set of values into a close-knit community. The circumstances described in "which seemed ideal to a set of loose rural communities . . . Roelvaag^s Giants in the Earth provide an example of just such a betrayed us in the conditions of a new age..." (Whipple, 119). community. Even supposing a whole community migrates in a The process of change from a predominantly rural and body—as often was the case, as we have seen—the communal life agricultural to an urban and industrial society quickened in the cannot go on as it had previously (Whipple, 33). And the history post-Civil War period. According to Henry Steele Commager (44), of such transplanted communities again and again shows that from the mid-1880s to the Spanish War: they inevitably and necessarily change as they adapt to new conditions and demands, and more often tha dissolve h The new America came in as on flood tide. These yearsn not, . T e community ofNe Plymouth bsorbed int Massachusett witnessed the passing of the old West, the disappearance of w was a o s i 1691 b hich im h heocrati lement f h the frontier line and of good, cheap farm land, the declinen , y w t e t e t c e s o t e community had bee drastically duced Whil h Pilgrim had pooled of the cattle kingdom, the completion of the transcontinentals n re . e t e s hei ... They revealed a dangerous acceleration of the exploitationt r resources to purchase the Mayflower, and began as ists haring land d labor young f h ity of natural resources; the seizure of the best forest, mineral,commun , s an , men o t e commun bega bjec kingfo he families d range, and farm land by corporations; and the beginningssoon n to o t to wor r ot r men's , resente their wives having to work for others, and the providen d of the conservation and reclamation movement. They weret an industrious rankled at receiving d ha h hiftless marked by a profound and prolonged agricultural malaise no more rewar t n t e s . Th isti perimen llapsed did y ha ld and the transfer of economic and political gravity frome commun c ex t co , as man t t wou follo it h lymouthColony' dgoverno Willia dford country to city.w . T e P s secon r m Bra (120-21; cf. also Wish, 27-28) cited the failure of the experiment The new America caused students of American life to re- as proof that the arrangement was contrary to human nature examine the American character, values, and traditional . As Whipple reminds us, the twin impulses of community. Sherwood Anderson (247), in Winesburg, Ohio, a individualism and community, in combination with unrestricted freedom, collection of interrelated stories subtitled "The Book of the abundant land and natural resources, has not ledAmericans to Grotesque," examined the dark underside of small-town American the NewJerusalem they set out to find While statute books and life. Representative of the thousands of young people who left . the courts far into the nineteenth century reflected distrust of rural areas and small towns for life in large cities during the late unregulated economic life, and while Utopianexperiments, mass nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, Anderson's protagonist COMMUNITY 35 George Willard leaves Winesburg at the end of the book, and the period R Scott Fitzgerald (225-26) described Tom and Daisy community in which he has grown up becomes "but a background Buchanan, the principle characters in The Great Gatsby, as "... on which to paint the dreams of his manhood." Edgar Lee careless people [who] smashed up things and creatures and then Masters' Spoon River Anthology (91), a sort of Main Street in retreated to their money or their vast carelessness, or whatever verse, presents a gallery of village and small-town failures— it was that kept them together, and let other people clean up the disillusioned and broken lawyers, would-be artists and poets, mess they had made." Many students of American life saw these druggists, dentists, doctors, farmers, housewives, bankers, village characters and their attitudes and actions as representatives of atheists, and dissenters—all stunted by the narrowness and American attitudes and actions generally. They typified individual mediocrity of their community, suffering under the community's aims, goals, and desires operating to the detriment of the communal hypocrisy, racism, and injustice and anti-intellectualism and good. narrowness. Spoon River rarely proves nurturing and supportive The Great Depression of the 1930s forced a temporary return of the promise and potential of the community's individual to emphasis on the common good. (In our survey of the famiy we members. More often it proves a dark cellar, as Mrs. Charles have seen how American families became more closely knit Bliss explains after she and her husband have been advised by during the Depression.) James Still (8-9), in his classic novel of the village preacher and judge to remain in a loveless marriage the Appalachian South, River of Earth, depicts a family in the "for the sake of the children": process of closing ranks in the face of economic setback. The Now every gardener knows that plantsgrown in cellars mother says to her family: "We've got to live small... We've got Or der tones twisted d yellow d k. to tie ourselves up in such a knot nobody else can get in." During un s are an an wea And ther ld let her baby k these years President Franklin D. Roosevelt succeeded in causing no mo wou suc Diseased ilk from her breast the entire nation, for the first time in its history, to think of itself m Yet preachers d judges dvise the ising f ls as a single community with a common problem to overcome, and an a ra o sou Where there is light, but ly twilight, to pull together much as the family in Still's River of Earth drew no sun on No th, but ly dampness d ld itself into a knot in a time of great need. warm on an co — Preachers and judges! But the Great Depression also served to intensify the re- examination of the American character and American values set The critical examination of community and the American in motion by the new America, which came on like a flood tide in experience continues to this day. On the one hand we find the 1880s. In 1950 Harry Riesman contributed to this re- expressions of discontent with narrow, stifling communities such examination—which continues to this day—with The Lonely as Winesburg, Ohio, and Spoon River, communities which oppress Crowd, a book whose title suggested a felt absence of genuine the individual. On the other hand, a widely held view is that community in America In the 1980s Robert Bellah, in collaboration values and attitudes suited to a former time, when the frontier with five other authors, produced a study entitled Habits of the was open and natural resources were apparently limitless, have Heart, which stands, along with The Lonely Crowd, in a tradition persisted into a time when those conditions no longer apply. The going back to Alexis de Tocqueville's Democracy in America, from result has been reckless and irresponsible behavior destructive which the title Habits of the the Heart is derived. of community and the common good. In the post-World War I Bellah and his co-authors identify four personalities that 36 The Examined Life: Family, Community, and Work in American Literature have emerged during the course of American history; these says, "These are my values, but they don't have to be anyone personalities embody values and attitudes with profound else's." The authors of Habits of the Heart find that this attitude implications for the concept of community in American life. has so permeated American life that many newly formed Exemplified by the Puritan leader John Winthrop, by Thomas "intentional" communities are nothing more than "lifestyle Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, and the nineteenth-century poet enclaves," and even the most intimate human relationships, Walt Whitman, these personalities represent, respectively, Biblical, such as marriage, are thought of as contracts negotiated for the republican, utilitarian individualist, and expressive individualist mutual benefit of autonomous individuals (Bellah, 85-86,93-97, values. Bellah and his associates conclude that Biblical and et passim; and the Glossary of Key Terms, which defines "Biblical republican personalities, and the concepts of the good life they tradition," "community," "community of memory," "expressive embody (chief among them being civic virtue), live on in the individualism," "republican tradition," "lifestyle enclave," American experience, but they have lost ground to the utilitarian "utilitarian tradition," and other key terms used in the book). individualism represented by Franklin and to the expressive Such a conclusion is suggested by Frances Fitzgerald's Cities individualism represented by the life and work of Whitman. on a Hill: A Journey Through Contemporary American Cultures. These two individualisms, in combination with a growing Fitzgerald examines four contemporary efforts, in a tradition psychotherapeutic approach to self, are not conducive to the dating back to the Plymouth Colony, to establish and maintain growth and maintenance of community. Bellah, et. al. find that communities dedicated to a single ideal or lifestyle. Two of these, the utilitarian and expressive individualisms embraced by the the Castro in San Francisco, and the Rajneeshpuram commune majority of Americans prevent us from recognizing the complex in Oregon, grow out of the spirit of the 1960s, and were established interdependence our society now requires of us. Believing that on the ideas of the Gay Rights movement and New Age spirituality, the greatest good is either to win, to "make it" financially or respectively. A third, the Reverend Jerry Falwell's Liberty Baptist professionally, or to develop our individual selves to the greatest Community, is seen as a reaction to the alternative lifestyle of the degree possible, we have an undeveloped appreciation for Castro. And a fourth community, the Sun City retirement village community and the public good, and tend to behave collectively, in Florida, was an entire town made up of older Americans who much as do Tom and Daisy Buchanan, with a "vast carelessness" enjoyed good health, were affluent, and had made a conscious for the communal or public implications of our behavior. Too decision to live apart from their families. many Americans, Bellah and his colleagues believe, live like All four communities can be seen as standing in an American Homer's race of Cyclops, who dwelt apart with little concern for Utopian tradition, dating from the earliest colonists, in which one another. people form into a group for the purpose either of escaping The sense of community implicit in John Winthrop's "city on mainstream society or providing an example to that society, or a hill," and the civic virtue, which is the essence of Jefferson's both. And like earlier communities in this tradition, each of these social and political philosophy, are conspicuously absent in has either failed, changed significantly from its original conception, contemporary America, according to this critique, and in their or succeeded only to a modest degree. Like previous communities, place we have brands of individualism that tell us something is these at first attempted to impose their vision on the larger good if it works (utilitarian individualism), or if it feels right society, then necessarily changed as the enthusiasms of the (expressive individualism), together with an attitude which members waned, or as the communities' ideals confronted the COMMUNITY 37 realities of existing within the larger society. At first the Castro collective American experience. was idealistic and uninhibited. Then one of the community's An analysis of the American experience and social reality most influential supporters, a member of the San Francisco which to some degree parallels that of Bellah and his co-authors Board of Supervisors, was assassinated, an event which fragmented is Robert Reich's (8-13) Tales of a New America. Reich identifies the gay community; and soon thereafter the AIDS epidemic, four American morality tales, stories rooted in the American closely associated with the gay community in San Francisco, experience, which we tell ourselves in the attempt to make sense began to attract the attention of the nation. of our lives. One story Reich calls "The Mob at the Gates," which The Reverend FalwelTs Liberty Baptist Community originally conceives of America as "a beacon light of virtue in a world of provided its members with a world apart from the society at darkness," a country "uniquely blessed, the proper model for large, but, especially after the community established Liberty other people's aspirations, the hope of the world's poor and University, it became increasingly clear that Bible-based truth oppressed." This view of America, foretold in John Winthrop's alone was not adequate preparation for life in late twentieth- sermon, "A Model of Christian Charity," is an example of what century America. Bellah refers to as the Biblical tradition in American life; it The Rajneeshpuram in Oregon at first was held together by requires a sense of community, but it also contains the seeds of the fervor of its members and by its charismatic leader the paranoia concerning those who are outside the gates. Bhagwan, but from the beginning the community was at odds The second story is that of "The Triumphant Individual" and with Oregonians living nearby. The leaders of the commune is told, early on, in The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin, eventually betrayed one another (one disappeared with community which has become paradigmatic of the American success story. It funds, another testified against other community leaders during is the story of the individual of humble beginnings who works, court proceedings), the Bhagwan was deported, and the community risks, and eventually wins wealth, fame, and honors. The story fell apart. of the self-made man or woman, it suggests that anyone with a Sun City continues as a retirement village, but its members modicum of wit, grit, and determination can "make it." Recent face a rather bleak and lonely future which falls far short of the versions of this story are Rocky and/acocca. community's original promise of happiness and companionship. Reich's third story is that of "The Benevolent Community." The four communities examined by Fitzgerald resemble the In this story American neighbors and Mends roll up their many similar experiments which have preceded them in American sleeves, pitch in, and help one another. It is a story of self- history not only in the way they fall short of their original sacrifice, community pride, and patriotism. This story helps expectations. They resemble earlier experiments also in that the explain the effort in the nineteenth century to emancipate very rootlessness of so many Americans now, as then, engenders slaves, to gain the vote for women, and in the 1960s to help the motivation to create community. And so community American blacks and other minorities secure civil rights. With experiments of the past quarter century can be seen as the work this story we associate New England meetings where issues of rootless people in search of community. As long as there are affecting the whole community were debated; house- and barn- Americans who have made a break with the past, who have no raisings on the frontier, participated in by the whole community. strong attachments to kin or place, and who are free to move or This story accounts for Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal, Truman's start over, we may expect to see this strand of utopianism in the Fair Deal, and Johnson's Great Society, slogans summarizing 38 The Examined Life: Family, Community, and Work in American Literature policies that asked Americans to think ofthe entire nation as a The Greening of America, represents this considerable body of single community; which asked the manytopull together as opinion when he asserts that economic growth often means "less one. With this story we tell ourselves that we are a generous people of everything we really need, aside from material goods." One of with concern for our neighbors and fellow citizens; that wework the things we really need, Reich believes, is a sense of community. to make opportunity available to all; that we are all one big But "communities deteriorate when local companies want to make family, one large community. so much money that they leave the communities and go where Reich's fourth story is called "The Rot at the Top." This story labor is cheaper and where tax laws are more favorable" (52). is about evil elites, rich Richard John Neuhaus (37) in The Naked Public Square aristocrats, unscrupulous and greedy business leaders and government officials. It is a story about examines the loss of a sense of community in the religious sphere those who conspire to work against the common good. With this of American experience. He finds that a fundamentalist strain of story we associate casting off the yoke of arbitrary power during Protestantism has separated public argument from private belief, the American Revolution; the formation of labor unions to offset with the result that religious beliefs cannot be submitted to concentrations of economic power in vested interests. public reason. Neuhaus finds (82) that religion "as a mediating But, like all stories, these four stories rooted in the American structure—a community that generates and transmits moral experience are susceptible to different interpretations. In 'The values—is no longer available ..." The individual's beliefs have Mob at the Gates" we can congratulate ourselves with the become private and are valid for the individual, without reference interpretation that celebrates our "triumph over savages and to the beliefs of others; individual beliefs need not be submitted evil abroad!" Or we can understand the story in such a way as to to the examination of other individuals or to the community. reveal the difference between our actions and ideals, and conclude: Neuhaus' findings corroborate in the religious sphere what "The world is succumbing to tyranny, barbarism, and devastation, Bellah and his associates find generally in American society. while we stand idly by!" "The Triumpahnt Individual" can mean: David W. Brown in a discussion of "Civic Virtue in America" "Rejoice in the opportunity open to each of us to gain fame and points to changed conditions of life in America as a cause for the fortune!" or "Hard work and merit are sabotaged by convention, felt diminution of community. More and more Americans have chicanery, and prejudice!" "The Benevolent Community can gained access to "the portable credentials of higher education" mean: "Admire our generosity and compassion!" or "We are and now live and work cut off from "the local institutions in which selfish, narcissistic, racist, and indifferent—look at the poor and they were raised." These Americans constitute a new class whose hungry in our midst!" "The Rot at the Top" can mean: "See how members "appear to be passionate consumers instead of active we have overcome vested privilege!" or "Our democracy is a citizens—like lovely willow trees with shallow roots." In agreement sham, and everything important is controlled by a venal cabal at with Bellah, and corroborating Tocqueville (v. 2,257), who feared the top!" that Americans might end up "farming nothing but small coteries" A version of 'The Rot at the Top" can be seen in a body of instead of genuine communities, Brown finds members of this opinion which sees a powerful and greedy elite in the business new class calculating and self-absorbed ("You owe it to yourself," and corporate world (built on a philosophical base of instrumental "What's in it for me?"). The communities they join tend to be not or utilitarian individualism) functioning in such a way as to genuine communities with a diversity of people, values, views, harm family and community values. Charles Reich, the author of but communities of interest, enclaves composed of like-minded COMMUNITY 39 people with similar backgrounds, incomes, and tastes. Brown community, had changed. The small towns and ethnic sections of wonders whether a " 'community' of interest, if it has no earlier times had given way to what Robert Reich calls "economic geographical place, a neighborhood or a town, where friendship enclaves whose members had little in common with one another and obligation are practiced, can be sustained" (40). but their average incomes." And in this context the story of'The Even members of this new class who genuinely desire it Benevolent Community" had little applicability. Some observers discover the circumstances of their lives working against saw the Reagan recommendation of local volunteerism and commitment to local community. Thus Richard Fox (12), a concern for neighborhood as a sham, for in contemporary America professor of history and humanities at Reed College, admits: the idea of community and neighborhood offered a "way of It is difficult individually to enact both a professional enjoying the sentiment of benevolence without the burden of disciplinary istence d local ighborhood family acting on it" (Robert Reich, 171). ex an a ne existence. Family is an important community for is This conflation of immediate neighborhood and community me, as a professional discipline. Local ity is where I do caused people to feel that responsibility ended at the borders of commun t seem to spend y time. There y be irreducible their own neighborhoods, and since most Americans could seeno an ma an flict here, d the best that we hope for is ging that their neighborhoods were not suffering, little charity needcon an can emer in some possible ities but t in ll possible be exercised. If there were needy people, in some other commun no a neighborhood, members of that other neighborhood, that other communities. community, bore the responsibility for helping out. This view Indeed, there is little evidence that community can prosper allowed the poor to cluster in their own neighborhoods, in large apart from a particular place, a neighborhood, locale, or town. cities, isolated from affluent suburbs that ringed them. The For the new class of highly mobile and highly educated people (a Reagan-Bush approach to neighborhood and community amounted class to which Richard Fox belongs) it might seem that they could to hollow rhetoric, according to one analyst. "Pure volunteerism, conceive of the nation as a community in which they might as espoused by the Reagan-Bush administration, asks the private function and to which they could feel a commitment. But the sector to fill gaps created by American capitalism and vacated by sense of the entire nation as a single community seems to be a retreating federal government; essentially, it leaves the war on capable of creation only in extraordinary circumstances, and for poverty in the hands of the vigilantes" (Bennett, A-7). limited periods, as, for instance, during the Great Depression or According to these dour commentaries, genuine community during World War II. By the 1960s Lyndon Johnson was unable is lacking both in the larger nation-community and in the to evoke a similar sense of national community for the War on smaller neighborhoods. Poverty or the Vietnam War, and by the 1980s President Ronald One looks in vain for a commentator on American life who can Reagan repudiated Roosevelt's vision of the country as a national report a satisfactory sense of contemporary community. Liberal community in favor of a view of the nation as a collection of local and conservative pundits alike deplore the lack of community, communities (Robert Reich, 170). (This view was echoed in but disagree on how community is appropriately promoted or President George Bush's repeated references during the 1988 supported. Conservatives tend to see activism on the part of presidential campaign to "a thousand points of light.") intellectuals in government, especially at the national level, as By the late 1980s the meaning of neighborhood, and hence of destructive of community, while liberals are more likely to see 40 The Examined Life: Family, Community, and Work in American Literature "commitments to community ... under constant attack, not by Schlesinger, correspond roughly to political and social conservatism intellectuals or counter-cultures, as conservatives imagine, but and liberalism in the American experience, and have been in by corporate capitalism... ." (Fox, 10). constant interplay and cyclical alternation throughout our history. A liberal observer, Bill Moyers wonders on a Public When the essentially liberal and optimistic tradition is in the Broadcasting System program in the autumn of 1988 whether ascendency, the sense of community and social responsibility the automobile might not have made it possible for us to get expands, and notions of freedom and equality flourish. As the around without getting together; whether automobiles have not tradition runs its cyclical course, it is supplanted by the counter- allowed the prosperous to escape to suburbs, commute to work in tradition, which brings in a period of retrenchment, an era the cities, and daily by-pass the poor in the inner cities. George devoted to emphasis on the individual and private interest. In Will, a generally conservative syndicated columnist who ordinarily such a period the sense of community contracts. stands four-square for the rights of the individual, suggests in a Schlesinger estimates the cycles of tradition and counter- televised roundtable in the same season that we might have too tradition to be approximately thirty years in duration. The much of even such a good thing as individual rights: we are period encompassing the Great Depression and lasting until well forever asserting the rights of the individual, he opines, but we into the 1960s constituted a cycle in which the liberal tradition must remember that the community has rights, too. was in the ascendency. President John F. Kennedy in 1961 could What are we to make of these various analyses of the still exhort Americans to ask not what their country could do for American character, these interpretations of American history, them, but what they could do for their country. During this time and these observations about contemporary American life? Are Americans responded positively to a vision of the entire nation as these different "personalities" with their visions of the good life a single community. That period was followed by an assertion of jostling in disorderly fashion down through our history? Are the conservative counter-tradition and an emphasis on the different American morality tales being told simultaneously and individual and private interests. discordantly generation after generation? The dire predictions of sociologists and journalists with Perhaps these analyses may be subsumed under the regard to the erosion of community in America might well be interpretation set forth by Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr. (et passim) considered in the context of this cyclical interpretation of American in The Cycles of American History, in which he explains American history, which, if it has validity, suggests that the idea of community history in terms of a tradition and a counter-tradition, both of in the American experience waxes and wanes, and that the which spring from the world-view and values of our colonial darkest hour for community is always just before a brightening forebears. The people who established New Plymouth and the of prospects. Massachusetts Bay Colony were both pessimistic and optimistic The voting habits of Americans lend support to Schlesinger's about human nature and life in this world; they were both interpretation of American history as a tradition and a counter- pragmatic and idealistic. On the one hand they believed man was tradition, one essentially liberal and idealistic and favorable to weak, limited, and fallen, and could be depended upon to err; on the formation and maintenance of community; the other essentially the other, they felt themselves to be an elect people with a pragmatic and conservative and tending to emphasize the mission to build the "city upon a hill" that would be a model for individual. A syndicated columnist analyzing the results of the other people. This tradition and counter-tradition, according to 1988 elections noted that twenty-two of the fifty states sent COMMUNITY 41 divided delegations (one liberal, one conservative senator) to the When we listen attentively to what contemporary Americans U. S. Senate, and in four out of the past five elections the voters actually say, as has Studs Terkel (etpassim) mAmerican Dreams: have put one party in charge of the White House and the other Lost and Found, we find both the impulses to individualism and in charge of the Congress. The columnist took these data to mean the urge for community, both Schlesinger's tradition and counter- that "Americans don't want an energetic government," and cited tradition, in microcosm. For Americans are pragmatic, but they an elder statesman who considered such voting patterns irrational are also idealistic; they are materialistic, but they also dream and tending to result in "divided and deadlocked government" about and value things other than material and financial success. (Kilpatrick,A-4). Americans are highly individualistic, but they also find great It is also possible to view these voting patterns as evidence of satisfaction in, and place value on, family, community, and work both the tradition and counter-tradition Schlesinger posits; as things worthwhile in themselves. evidence of both pragmatic and idealist impulses in the American The twin impulses toward individualism on the one hand and electorate, one essentially conservative, the other liberal; one community on the other often manifest themselves as ambivalence, favoring government which tends to be activist and focused on as in voting habits, or in the way we define "neighborhood" and the community good, the other favoring a relatively passive "community" in word and deed. Constance Perin inBelonging in government (especially in domestic affairs) which gives greater America argues that we are conspicuously equivocal not only scope to the individual. The voting patterns may be interpreted about whom we call "neighbor," but also about what we consider to mean Americans understand that the impulses toward community. We may value community, yet we readily leave individualism and toward community are both legitimate; that communities for better jobs or homes elsewhere. We aren't sure both continuity and change, progress and stability are desirable. where the boundaries of our neighborhoods are. We don't George Will ("Another Muddy Message," 30) suggests that necessarily consider the people next door, or on the same block, Americans are "idealogically conservative," and therefore wary our neighbors. Yet Perin cites a California farmer who in 1986 of big government, while at the same time "operationally liberal" sent hay to drought-stricken farmers in Greorgia because "We're and quite willing to tolerate government when we have faith that 'cross the United States, but we're still a neighbor" (Fischer, 18). it is operating on our behalf. Our vote for president is an Such statements are valuable, for we are usually least ideological and expressive act which affirms "what we are and articulate about those things that matter most to us and which want to be tomorrow." Voting for president, we are ideologically we therefore take most for granted. Thus, concepts like family, conservative. When we vote for senators and representatives, community, and work are so deeply imbedded in our consciousness, and for state and local offices, our vote is more likely to be based so value-laden and freighted with feeling, that our most revealing on what we want right now, hence operationally liberal. expressions of them are apt to be in off-hand remarks such as Expressively we are against big government and governmental that of the California farmer, or in the oblique revelations of regulation of our lives; operationally we require government anecdotes, folk tales, customs, and patterns discerned in details programs and big government capable of mounting such programs. of seemingly insignificant daily life. Perhaps the electorate instinctively understands, as Robert Despite the changes that improved transportation and Bellah and his co-authors believe, that "communal commitment communications have brought, and despite our ambivalence and individual fulfillment rise or fall together" (Fox, 10). about who our neighbors are and about the boundaries of our 42 The Examined Life: Family, Community, and Work in American Literature communities, we may expect place to continue to play a vital role World, but will include many local worlds within it. We need in our notion ofcommunity The conventional wisdom has been these local worlds because "human beings require more than that as various parts of the country are connected by railways, health and economic security." Human life is also made up of highways, and airline routes, and means of almost instantaneous "emotional and spiritual satisfactions that have their origins in electronic communications, regional differences would be our contacts with our physical world and social surroundings." diminished But wehave less and less reason to consider regions These local worlds are the immediate communities in which. and regional variations to be isolated, archaic survivals in a we live. They are made necessary, paradoxically, because nation- standardizing country On the contrary,not onlyin America,but states, and the industrialized world everywhere, do not provide . all over the world, people are rediscovering their regions a sufficient sense of community. E. D. Hirsch (96) stresses this and provinces Renewed interest in regionshasbeen characterized as point in Cultural Literacy when he writes:. world-wide "local centripetalism" (Troike, 2). Throughout the If our system had not encouraged localism and diversity, 1970s, a journalist discovered, new realities of power and people we would in any case have developed them. I four diversity were making the North American continent into nine different had not arisen from immigration, local accident, and "nations" (Garreau, et passim). other historical causes, we would have evolved local New realities ofpower and peopleare causing us toexperience, differences anyway. Localism is constantly being reinvented according to Harold Isaacs (1), "on a massively universal scale a all over the world, since the large, modern national state convulsive ingathering of people in their numberless groupings does not and cannot lend enough social glue or emotional in kinds—tribal, racial, linguistic, religious, national."This world meaning to satisfy the human desire for community. - wide assertion of group identity is in itself a search for community, Our communities are already, and in the future will increasingly and has implications for the kinds of community we may hope to be, what Bellah refers to in Habits of the Heart as "communities create. Isaacs finds that the relative positions of the individual of memory," places whose people are bound together by an and the group have shifted in contemporary society, a fact which understanding of a common past, a shared history and heritage. "touches the bedrock of the whole American system. . . ." Our The markers for such communities will continue to be, to varying system is based on the rights of the individual, yet individuals degrees, linguistic distinctiveness—regional speech and dialectical are coming to new perceptions of themselves as members of usage. For just as distinctive speech patterns constitute a boundary groups and claiming rights not as individuals, but as members of that excludes some people, the same boundary includes others groups. This new relationship of the "one" to the "many" has and identifies them as members of a speech community. In the implications for communityand is not unrelated to considerations tenth canto of The Divine Comedy (40-44) Dante, escorted through of place (212-13) a region of hell by Virgil, is overheard speaking in his Tuscan . According to Rene Dubos (10), "we are beginning to witness dialect by one of the souls enduring torture there, who calls out a revival ofregionalism that will complement the global pointof to Dante: view." This revival is a reaction to a powerful trend toward O Tuscan! thou, who through the city of fire uniformity; it comes not despite the world's having grown smaller, Alive art passing, so discreet of speech: but because it has done so. The likely result, Dubos believes, will Here, please thee, stay awhile. Thy utterance be that the world of forty or fifty years from now will be One Declares the place of thy nativity ... COMMUNITY 43 The condemned soul is so charmed by the sound of his native their home to embrace citizenship in the world city of ideas and speech that for a while at least he is able to forget the tortures of culture that their education offers them"—without realizing that hell as he converses with Dante. Language, to a significant they are asking students to give up "real and immediate connections degree, defines, creates, and maintains a sense of community, as in favor of an abstraction." Zencey challenges professors to the unknown author of these doggerel lines on the expression overcome their "prejudice against the local and provincial"; to "you-all" suggests: "You-all means a race or section/ Family, "take the trouble to include local content in courses"; to "take party, tribe, or clan;/You-all means the whole connection/ Of the more seriously the regional branches of professional organizations individual man" (Bartlett, 922). Often we are strangely comforted in our various disciplines"; and to acquire "dual citizenship—in and reassured by the familiar way a person speaks, even if we the world of ideas and also in the very real counties, states, disagree with what is said. "Home in the twentieth century," the regions, and ecosystems in which we find ourselves " Zencey journalist Dave Hickey observes, "is less where your heart is calls for cosmopolitan educators who cultivate a sense of place than where you understand the sons-of-bitches" (Garreau, vi). and "exemplify... a successful resolution of the tension between By being sensitive to the linguistic communities and the local and the universal" (72). (Zencey's approach is being communities of memory that already exist, educators at every disregarded in the current rush to "universalize" college and level can contribute to the creation and maintenance of community, university curricula) (Vasquez, A-48). and to its extension to include "the whole connection" of the A model of such an educator might be Edwina Sheppard individual man or woman. As Dewey advocated in Experience Pepper, who established the John A. Sheppard Ecological and Education, this sensitivity on the part of educators requires Reservation in West Virginia; who was also instrumental in intimate acquaintance with the conditions of the local community founding the Big Laurel School of Learning for mountain children; in which one teaches, with its physical, historical, economic, and and who was described by consumer advocate Ralph Nader as an occupational conditions, in order to utilize the student's immediate "unsung heroine" for her imaginative and creative response to world as an educational resource (Selznick, 48). environmental problems of her community. "As more and more There are encouraging signs that American educators are land has been stripped or deep mined," Nader explained, "the more favorably inclined to give serious consideration to local inhabitants of these mountains have lost not only their homes, community than they have been within the past half century. In but also their sense of worth. Mrs. Pepper has tried to restore the an essay entitled "The Rootless Professors," Eric Zencey, a feeling of community and resourcefulness the inhabitants' professor of history and philosophy at Goddard College, signals forefathers knew" (Edwina Pepper, B-12). a changed attitude. For too long, Zencey writes, American college In making community a more important consideration in the and university professors have fancied themselves as "citizens of educational process, regional and local perspectives can be some mythical 'world city' or cosmopolis" who "may be extremely useful. They can present academic disciplines as they systematically blind to some of the crucial elements of an integrated interpenetrate and impinge on one another; issues and problems life—the life that is one of the primary goals of a liberal arts in contexts that do not dwarf the individual; and the possibility education—and to the values of connectedness to place." College of better combinations of thought and action, knowledge and and university professors have typically asked their students to power, scholarship and citizenship. Regional approaches offer "renounce citizenship in the political and biotic communities of both ways of understanding the geography behind history and 44 The Examined Life: Family, Community, and Work in American Literature ways of understanding history in a geographical context. Ellen Goodman (228-29), an acute observer of the contemporary Community-based approaches can also provide opportunities scene, has called this withdrawal "a privatization of everything." to instruct students in practical economics, as Paul Gagnon Symbolic of this privatization of all aspects of our lives during the maintains in "Why Study History?" (56), a study of the way past decade, she thinks, was the conversion of a Boston church American history is presented in widely used textbooks. Gagnon into a condominium. A church, a place where people communed, finds that textbooks inadequately instruct young Americans in was converted into rentable, leasable, purchaseable private the way economic expansion has always been supported by spaces. This conversion illustrates, in Goodman's view, a general public efforts. In the past this expansion "was heavily subsidized turning away from community into private spaces, a greater by American consumers, taxpayers, workers, and also by slave concern with private goods than with the public good. If our lives labor in the South and by an earlier generation of British and are focused on private consumption, so goes this argument, we Europeans, whose labor produced investment capital. Subsidy are disposed to reduce our support of public efforts and institutions remains a bad word in the American lexicon, yet it is axiomatic (education, safety, recreation). For when we think of ourselves that all enterprise must in some way be subsidized to one degree primarily as consumers, we will prefer burglar alarms to police or another.... Texts could say that there is nothing wrong with forces; private gardens to public parks; private vacations to subsidy as such, provided that the gains and losses are reasonably community recreation; Home Box Office and video discs to public distributed. It is another name for community effort." libraries or public broadcasting. We will see nothing odd about Such an understanding of American economic history would cutting subsidies to mass transportation while making government render less utopian Robert Reich's concept of "collective loans to automakers. entrepreneurialism," which conceives of a firm or corporation as Parents and students, this argument contends, have even a community (Robert Reich, 150). This or a similar presentation been asked to think of themselves as consumers of education, of American economic history would help to blend the message of with the result that more and more emphasis is placed on short- capitalism, which says the individual must make it on his own, term benefits, and education is viewed in an increasingly narrow with the Christian message (valued by the founders of Plymouth way. We look for education that can be quickly translated into Colony) that says we bear responsibility for our neighbors and for good (by which we mean well-paying) jobs. The long-term value others in our community and encourages us to think of ourselves and the broader view of education are less and less emphasized as community members. when we think of education as a product, not as a process, and of A widely held point of view maintains that our way of ourselves as consumers of it. thinking and talking about American life overemphasizes the Communities must of course consist of intelligent, thoughtful role of the individual, while underemphasizing the importance of individuals whose capacities are developed to their fullest. Both community, thus impoverishing our entire moral discourse. statements remind us that while training is an important part of According to this critique, we are increasingly asked to think of any education, training alone can only make us into a tool, an ourselves as individual consumers, with the result that a sense instrument to be employed by someone else. Genuine education of community, of purposes pursued in common, is eroded. aims to produce more than a one-eyed Cyclopean view of life as Encouraged in mean-spirited self-interest and self-absorption, consumership lived in private spaces by people who "reck not of we withdraw from generosity, compassion, concern for others. one another." In the same way that our two eyes, working COMMUNITY 45 together, produce a single vision, our training and our education blacks. In Southern Appalachia two different economies and function as two eyes which can work together, providing vision cultures mingled: the planter economy and culture of the lowland for our individual lives as well as for our lives in common with South and the economy and culture of the small, independent others; coordinating our vocations and our citizenship in a single farmer. This mingling of economies and cultures, nationalities vision which sees, as N. Scott Momaday once put it, "beyond all and ethnic groups made Appalachia, according to the historian the billboards of illusion" that confront us when we think of Wertenbaker (The Old South, 219), "a test laboratory of American ourselves only as consumers of goods and services. civilization." The alternative to the one-eyed, Cyclopean life of individuals Southern Appalachia was and still is a test laboratory of who take no thought for one another is suggested by the poet American civilization. In the nineteenth century Cassius Clay Gary Snyder (101), whose recommendations for effective citizenship considered the people of the mountain South natural supporters begin with a consideration of community as a physical place. It of freedom because they owned land but few slaves (Peck, 4,64). is not possible, Snyder writes, to make things better "withoutour And today one of the things being tested is whether or not—as feet on the ground. Stewardship means, for most of us, find your Robert Coles (201) suspects—there is something redemptive for place on the planet, dig in, and take responsibility from there " all America in the experiences, the values, the culture, the Snyder's conception of citizenship assumes work at the community "community of memory" known as Southern Appalachia. level—the "tangible work of school boards, county supervisors, In years past many young college- and university-trained local foresters, local politics. Even while holding in mind the people from Southern Appalachia have had to go outside their largest scale of potential change. Get a sense of a workable region to find opportunities in professions. Regrettably, higher territory, learn about it, and start acting point by point." education has often effectively cut people off from their communities The Appalachian region of America is a workable territory; it and people. Amother from Blackey, Kentucky (Reck, 24), expressed is a definable place on the planet where citizens can dig in and what many parents have felt over the years when she said, take responsibility, where work at the level of local community is commenting on the exodus of young people, "We lose our purpose compatible with national and international perspectives. The when we lose our children . . . they . . . become citizens of Appalachian region is one of those potential "communities of nowhere." memory and hope" considered so important by Robert Bellah and In recent years it has been increasingly possible for college- the other authors of Habits of the Heart. For Appalachian America, and university-trained people to find opportunities within their according to the historian Carl Degler (5), has an interesting and Southern Appalachian region. This may become increasingly the complex triple history. The region has the double history shared case, for Southern Appalachia has many needs—health care by all Southerners—a history as Southerners and as Americans. professionals, teachers, nurses, trained professionals in local Additionally, southern Appalachia has a history of its own, as government, community workers of all kinds. The efforts of neither north or south, as a borderland America, a place between humanities educators in the Southern Appalachian region can places. contribute to a "community of memory and hope"; as teachers of In Southern Appalachia, America's first frontier, many different history, literature, economics, political science, and other disciplines groups came together: the English and Scotch-Irish, the Swiss, associated with the humanities, the region's educators can help the Germans, the French, together with native Americans and to replace "citizens of nowhere" with citizens of somewhere— 46 The Examined Life: Family, Community, and Work in American Literature communities constituted by both space and time, by a sense of The Scarlet Letter history and collective experience and an understanding that by Nathaniel Hawthorne individual good and the welfare of the total community are inseparable Often considered the first genuinely American novel, The. Our writers contribute significantly to our awareness of Scarlet Letter is a central text in the American literary canon, ourselves as members of a community For in contemporary recognized for the universality of its story, the humanness of its . America, just as they have donein all times and places, writers characters, for its form and structure, and for the appropriateness function as creators and sustainers of communities of memory. of its language. Hawthorne's story is about concealed sin (with Writers, John Updike (23) has pointed out recently, instruct the emphasis more on the concealment than on the sin) and its community in matters of tribal identity. "Who we are, who our effects on four individuals—Hester Prynne, Arthur Dimmesdale, heroic fathers were, how we got where we are, why we believe Roger Chillingsworth, and Hester and Dimmesdale's daughter what we believe and act the way we do—these are all questions Pearl. Hawthorne is also concerned with the Puritan community the writer deals with, whether in poems, songs, or stories that in which his story is set, with its values, with the relationship of serve as memory banks." his main characters to the community, and with the way the A recent collection of stories by Wendell Berry (136-37) individuals affect the community, its attitudes, values, and more. provides a contemporary example of this ancient function of the From the moment Hester Prynne emerges from prison wearing writer as a creator and sustainer of community. Berry's collection the scarlet letter "A" on her dress, she is confronted—in the The Wild Birds bears the subtitle "Six Stories of the Port William market—by the community, represented by a number of deftly Membership," an allusion to the collection's theme of sketched minor characters. And at the end of the story, when the interdependence, the notion that the people of Berry's fictional Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale publicly acknowledges his guilt— Port William are all responsible to and for one another and to hei lace ha l hos h happe b livin h again in the marketplace, on a scaffold before the assembledt r p ; t t not on y t e w o n to e g at t e hav y i hings bu ls h dead d h ye citizenry—the confrontation is one between the individual and themoment e a sa n t , t a o t e an t e t born community. Hawthorne's story of these four individuals is framedun . They are all—the living, the dead, and the yet unborn of that place—part f bership A haracter Burly Coulter by an initial and a concluding confrontation with the community o a mem . s a c , , bserve i th titl tory,".. ber and its values while at the same time it shows the harshness ando s n e e s . we are mem s of each other. All of us. Everything. The difference ain't in who is a membe inflexibility with which these values are held and expressed.r and who is not but in whoknows it and whodon't. It is from such The individuals are changed by their confrontation with the , " communities ofmemory as those found in the writing of Berry community, but the community, too, is changed as the individuals, and other American writers that we are most likely to recover who have lived for the most part in isolation from it, are and carry forward our sense of community reintegrated into the community through the public revelation of. their sin, and through the community's interpretation of the Work by hre jo America iters—Hawthorne' Th meaning of the public revelation in the marketplace. In times t e ma r n wr s e Scarlet Letter, Thoreau' Civil Disobedience d Walden, d even the meaning of the scarlet letter itself changes from that of s " " an an Sinclai Lewis' Main Street provid th basi fo text-centered stigma to a symbol associated with sorrow, awe, and reverence,r s e e s r ideration f th them f ity i America life and Hester Prynne herself becomes a comforter and a counselorcons s o e e o commun n n . in the village. COMMUNITY 47 "Civil Disobedience" and Walden Main Street by Henry David Thoreau by Sinclair Lewis Many of Thoreau's assertions might at first give the impression Carol Milford Kennicott, the protagonist of Main Street, is that he dissociates himself from anyideaof community. "I am not similarly bent on waking her neighbors up and improving the responsible for the successful working of the machinery of society," community of Gopher Prairie, to which she has moved after he declares in "Civil Disobedience" (222-240).He expresses his marrying one of the town's residents, Dr. Will Kennicott. Her felt sense of difference and distance from his neighbors, as husband is representative of his community in that he is a when, coming out of jail for refusal topay taxes, he says he sawthat his complacent, conventional, self-satisfied booster of his home town, neighbors were "a distinct race from me by their prejudices and practical and matter-of-fact, not inclined to examine life—his superstitions, as the Chinaman and Maylays are "In the same own or anyone else's. Carol, however, wants to improve things. essay he writes, "I quietly declare war on the state ... though I She wants to reform her husband, Gopher Prairie, the whole will still make what use and get what advantage of her I can." community. Yet Thoreau is not unconcerned with the idea of community. In this effort she encounters opposition not only from her On the contrary, he desires a different and better kind of community husband, but from everyone else in Gopher Prairie. Or if not than what he finds available. His attitude toward his neighbors, active opposition, then stolid indifference. The men are interested toward the larger community of Concord, and toward the state is in cars and trains. They are xenophobic and convinced that their influenced by his individualism and devotion to principle and the town is the greatest place on earth. The women, who belong to highest calling of his conscience. Thoreau declares his desire to two clubs in town, The Jolly Seventeen and The Thanatopsis be "a good neighbor" and "a bad subject" (of the state). He calls Club, have no interests beyond homemaking, cooking, and their for a community and a government which can children. They have no conception of improving their lives, for show "a true respect for the individual." His move to Walden Pond, where he they see nothing wrong with things as they are. Carol Kennicott lived for over two years, is not a turning away from community, discovers that the members of The Thanatopsis Club, though or an antisocial act of withdrawal from community; rather, the officially dedicated to improving social conditions, are not interested move is an attempt to discover how a community might be better. in improving anything; in fact, they have no notion of what He undertakes a practical experiment to discover whether the improvements would entail. They are not interested in helping necessities of life could not be obtained more simply and easily the poor and deny that Gopher Prairie has any poor. Carol than was the case among his neighbors, who were caught up in discovers that the town librarian does not consider it part of her an unexamined, materialistic life. Thoreau goes to Walden Pond role to encourage people to read; more important to her is with his neighbors and the larger community in mind As he keeping the books in their proper places on the library shelves. announces early on in Walden, his purpose is to wake his Nevertheless, Carol Kennicott makes a number of efforts to neighbors up. His wish is to waken everyone to the realization change the community. She tries to raise funds for a new city hall. that living can be simple and yet fulfilling to the individual; that She puts on an amateur theatrical, has dreams of an annual it is possible to imagine a community compatible with greater Community Day—all in an effort to create a "more conscious life" freedom for its individual members. for the community. But she finds herself pitted against what 48 The Examined Life: Family, Community, and Work in American Literature de Tocqueville, in his classic examination of America, termed not only the idealist Carol Kennicott beside her complacent and the "tyranny of the majority." People in Gopher Prairie disapprove unimaginative husband, on a hot night in Gopher Prairie; they of her because she pays a maid a salary they consider too are antimonies in the complex of American attitudes, values, and generous. She demonstrates, in their view, that she is mores—the romantic, progressive, principled idealist impulse unconventional when she gives a party with an Oriental theme. alongside the realist, materialistic impulse which is, though She proves to be positively scandalous—especially after she has often crude and crass, nevertheless capable of seeing its opportunity a dalliance with a young tailor in the town. and taking it. One is reminded of the embodiment of these Eventually Carol Kennicott feels that the citizens of Gopher impulses in extreme form in Quentin and Jason Compson in Prairie are a race apart from her—no less than Thoreau felt William Faulkner's The Sound and the Fury. distanced from his neighbors after spending a night in jail. And when she and her husband "lie together in a hot bed in a creepy room—enemies, yoked" (284), she thinks they represent two races of people: a race of the "neurotic," to which she belongs, and a race of the "stupid," to which her husband Will and the other residents ofGopher Prairie belong Finally she is set apart from Works Cited . the community of Gopher Prairie and stigmatized by its residents Adams, John Quincy. Writings of John Quincy Adams. Edited by Worthington Chauncey Ford. no less than was Hester Prynne in Salem In the eyes of the V. 1-7. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1913-17. . residents of Gopher Prairie Carolwearsa letter R (for reformer) Anderson, Sherwood. Winesburg, Ohio. Edited by John H. Ferres. New York: The Viking Press. " " (fo ) The Viking Critical Library, 1966.or an "F r idealist . Barnes, Jonathan, ed. The Complete Works of Aristotle. 2 vols. The Revised Oxford Thinking to escape Gopher Prairie, its smug complacency Translation. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1984. and narrowness its refusal to examine life she leaves her Bartett, John. Familiar Quotations. Edited by Emily Morrison Beck. Fifteenth and 125th , , husband, and taking her young son with her goe t Washington Anniversary Edition, Revised and Enlarged. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1980., s o , Bellah, Robert, etal. Habits of the Heart. Individualism and Commitment in American Life. New where she hopes to become involved in war work. She needs to York: Harper & Row, 1985. find out what her work is (404). She discovers that Washington Bennet, James. "Gentle Fuzziness." Louisville, Kentucky Courier Journal, October 24,1988: is only a larger Gopher Prairie A-7.. Berry, Wendell. The Wild Birds. San Francisco: North Point Press, 1986. Boorstin, Daniel J. The Americans: The National Experience. New York: Random House, 1965. The Scarlet Letter, "Civil Disobedience" and Walden, and Bradford, William. Of Plymouth Plantation, 1620-1647. A new edition. The Complete Text. With Main Street offer varied instancesof individuals in their relationship Notes and an Introduction by Samuel Eliot Morison. New York: Alfred A Knopf, 1953. tocommunity Thetexts are useful in helpingtoisolate,examine, Brown, David W. "Civic Virtue in America." National Forum, LXVII.2 (1987): 39-41. . and better understand the tensions that exist in theAmerican Cappon, Lester J. The Adams-Jefferson Letters. 2 vols. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1959. experience between American individualism and our sense of Coles, Robert. "On the Humanities and on Appalachia." Appalachian Journal, 5.2 (1978): 197- community. The two "races" identified by Carol Kennicott in 203. Main Street correspondnot only to "two souls" resident in the Commager, Henry Steele. The American Mind. An Interpretation of American Thought and breast of Sinclair Lewis but to something in the American Character Since the 1880s. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1950, , haracter i America ltural lues Th ies yoked Dante Alighieri. The Divine Comedy. Tr. Henry F. Gary. New York: P. F. Collier & Son, 1937.c , n n cu va . e "enem , " are COMMUNITY 49 Degler, Carl N. The Other South. New York: Harper & Row, 1974. Perin, Constance. Belonging in America. Madison: The University of Wisconsin Press, 1988. Dick, Everett. The Dixie Frontier. A Social History of the Southern Frontier from the First Reck, Una Mae Lange, and Gregory G. Reck. "Living is More Important than Schooling: Transmontane Beginnings to the Civil War. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1948. Schools and Self Concept in Appalachia." Appalachian Journal, 8.1 (1980): 19-25. Dubos, Rene. "Recycling Social Man." Saturday Review/World, 24 August, 1974:8-10. Reich, Charles. The Greening of America. New York: Random House, 1970. Fischer, Claude S. Those People Next Door." New York Times Book Review, November 13, —. "The Liberals' Mistake." The Center Magazine, July/August 1987:49-59. 1988:18. Reich, Robert Tales of a New America. New York: Times Books, 1987. Fitzgerald, Frances. Cities on a Hill: A Journey Through Contemporary American Cultures. Riesman, Harry, with Nathan Glazer and Ruel Denney. The Lonely Crowd: A Study of the New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1925. Changing American Character. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1950. Fox, Richard. The Liberal Ethic and the Spirit of Protestantism." The Center Magazine. Russell, Bertrand. Skeptical Essays. George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1935. September/October 1987:4-14. Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr. The Cycles of American History. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1986. Freud, Sigmund. Collected Papers. Authorized translation by Alix and James Strachey. The Selznick, Philip. The Demands of the Community." 7776 Center Magazine, January/February International Psycho-Analytical Library. No. 9. Edited by Ernest Jones, M.D. 5 vols. New 1987:33-54. York: Basic Books, 1959. Shapiro, Larry, ed. A Book of Days in American History. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, Gagnon, Paul. "Why Study History?" The Atlantic Monthly. November 1988:43-66. 1987. Galbraith, John Kenneth. The Affluent Society. 3rd Rev. Ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1981. Snyder, Gary. Turtle Island. New York: New Directions Books, 1974. Goodman, Ellen. At Large. New York: Summit Books, 1981. Still, James. River of Earth. New York: Viking Press, 1940; rpt Lexington, Kentucky: The Greene, Evarts Boutell. The Revolutionary Generation. Vol. IV, A History of American Life, University Press of Kentucky, 1978. Arthur M. Schlesinger and Dixon Ryan Fox, eds. New York: The Macmillan Company, Terkel, Studs. American Dreams: Lost and Found. New York: Pantheon Books, 1980. 1929-48. Thoreau, Henry David. A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers, Walden, The Maine Hand, Learned. The Spirit of Liberty. Papers and Addresses of Learned Hand. Collected with Woods, Cape Cod. Cambridge, England: The Library of America, 1985. an introduction and notes by Irving Dilliard. Third edition, enlarged. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1952. —. Walden and "Civil Disobedience." With an Afterword by Perry Miller. New York: New American Library, 1960. Hawthorne, Nathaniel. The Scarlet Letter and The House of Seven Gables. With an introduction by James R. Mellow. New York: New American Library, 1981. Tocqueville, Alexis de. Democracy in America. In two volumes with a critical appraisal of each volume by John Stuart Mill. New York: Schocken Books, 1961. Hirsch, E. D., Jr. Cultural Literacy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987. Troike, Rudolph C. The Future of English." 77?e Linguistic Reporter, May 1977:1-5. Homer. The Odyssey of Homer. Translated with an introduction by Richard Lattimore. New York: Harper & Row, 1967. Updike, John. The Writer Lectures." The New York Review of Books, June 16,1988: 23-27. Isaacs, Harold. Idols of the Tribe. New York: Harper & Row, 1975. Vasquez, Jesse M. "Ethnic Studies Programs Are in Danger of Being Lost in the Current Rush to 'Universalize' the College Curriculum." 7776 Chronicle of Higher Education, November Kilpatrick, James J. "Americans don't want energetic government" Bowling Green, Kentucky 16, 1988:A-48. Daily News, November 9,1988: A-4. Wertenbaker, Thomas Jefferson. The First Americans. Vol. 11, A History of American Life, Arthur Leopold, Aldo. A Sand County Almanac. New York: Oxford University Press, 1966. M. Schlesinger and Dixon Ryan Fox, eds. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1929-48. Lewis, Sinclair. Main Street. With an Afterward by Mark Schorer. New York: New American —. 7770 Old South. New York: Cooper Square Publishers, Inc., 1963. Library, 1961. Whipple, T. K. Study Out the Land. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1943. Masters, Edgar Lee. Spoon River Anthofogy. New Edition with New Poems. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1959. Will, George. "Pin the label on the donkey." Newsweek, August 1,1988:62. Maugham, W. Somerset. The Moon and Sixpence. Garden City, New York: International —. "Another muddy message." Newsweek, November 21,1988:30. Collector's Library. 1919. Williams, Raymond. Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society. New York: Oxford Neuhaus, Richard John. The Naked Public Square. Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. University Press, 1976. Eerdman's Publishing Company, 1984. Wish, Harvey. Society and Thought in America. 2 vols. New York: Longmans, Green and Co., Peck, Elizabeth S. Berea's First 125 Years: 7555-1980 With a final chapter by Emily Ann Smith. 1950. . Lexington, Kentucky: The University Press of Kentucky, 1982. Zencey, Eric. The Rootless Professors." 7776 Chronicle of Higher Education, XXX. 15 (June 12, "Edwina Pepper, founder of mountain school, dies." Louisville, Kentucky Courier-Journal, 1985): 72. November 13,1988:6-12.