Book 
Reviews 
The Opening of the American Mind: Canons, Culture, and History. 
By Lawrence W. Levine. Reviewed by Greg Zacharias 121 
Written in Stone: Public Monuments in Changing Societies. 
By Sanford Levinson. Reviewed by Michael Kammen 122 
Border Theory: The Limits of Culture Politics. Edited by Scott Michaelsen 
and David E. Johnson. Reviewed by Gordon Sayre 123 
New Worlds for All: Indians, Europeans, and the Remaking of 
Early America. By Colin Calloway. Reviewed by Jon W. Paramenter 124 
Jonathan Edward's Writings: Text, Context, and Interpretation. 
Edited by Stephen J. Stein. Reviewed by Mason I. Lowance, Jr 125 
Conversing by Signs: Poetics of Implication in Colonial New England Culture. 
By Robert Blair St. George. Reviewed by Bryan F. Le Beau 127 
Conflicting Paths: Growing Up in America. By Harvey J. Graff. 
Reviewed by Gail S. Murray 128 
The Children's Civil War. By James Marten. Reviewed by Gail S. Murray 128 
Through a Glass Darkly: Reflections on Personal Identity in Early America. 
Edited by Ronald Hoffman, Mechal Sobel, and Fredrika J. Teute. 
Reviewed by Bryan F. Le Beau 130 
A True Republican: The Life of Paul Revere. By Jayne E. Triber. 
Reviewed by Bryan F. Le Beau 131 
Women in the American Theater: Actresses and Audience, 1790-1870. 
By Faye E. Dudden. Reviewed by Zoe Detsi 132 
Heart Versus Head: Judge-Made Law in Nineteenth-Century America. 
By Peter Karsten. Reviewed by Kermit L. Hall 133 
Inventing New England: Regional Tourism in the Nineteenth Century. 
By Dona Brown. Reviewed by Benjamin Goluboff 135 
Melville's City: Literary and Urban Form in Nineteenth-Century New York. 
By Wyn Kelley. Reviewed by Haskell Springer 136 
The Trials of Anthony Burns: Freedom and Slavery in Emerson's Boston. 
By Albert J. von Frank. Reviewed by Dawn Keetley 136 
117 
 Reading for Realism: The History of a U.S. Literary Institution, 1850-1910. 
By Nancy Glazener. Reviewed by David Goldstein-Shirley 138 
Whitman, Slavery, and the Emergence of "Leaves of Grass." By Martin Klammer. 
Reviewed by Gregory Eiselein 139 
The Strange Sad War Revolving. By Luke Mancuso. Reviewed by Sherry Ceniza. . 140 
Culture and Comfort: Parlor Making and Middle-Class Identity. 
By Katherine C. Grier. Reviewed by Ann Schofield 141 
Why the American Century? By Olivier Zunz. Reviewed by Kent Blaser 143 
The American Century: The Rise and Decline of the United States 
as a World Power. By Donald W. White. Reviewed by Kent Blaser 143 
The American Century. By Harold Evans. Reviewed by Kent Blaser 143 
The Dialect of Modernism: Race, Language, and Twentieth-Centwy Literature. 
By Michael North. Reviewed by Robert Butler 145 
Re-imagining the Modern American West: A Century of Fiction, History, 
and Art. By Richard Etulain. Reviewed by Lillian Schlissel 147 
Culture of Intolerance: Chauvinism, Class, and Racism in the United States. 
By Mark Nathan Cohen. Reviewed by Douglas Hartmann 147 
City Codes: Reading the Modern Urban Novel. By Hana Wirth-Nesher. 
Reviewed by Jerome Klinkowitz 149 
The Naturalistic Inner-City Novel in America: Encounters with the Fat Man. 
By James R. Giles. Reviewed by Jerome Klinkowitz 149 
The American Country Club: Its Origins and Development. By James Mayo. 
Reviewed by David C. Hammack 150 
The White Scourge: Mexicans, Blacks, and Poor Whites in Texas Cotton Culture. 
By Neil Foley. Reviewed by Jorge Iber 151 
Victims and Heroes: Racial Violence in the African American Novel. 
By Jerry H. Bryant. Reviewed by Lawrence Rodgers 152 
Individualism and its Discontents. By Charles E. Mitchell. Reviewed by 
Mary Kupiec Cayton 153 
The Important Things in Life: Women, Work, and Family in Sweetwater County, 
Wyoming, 1880-1929. By Dee Garceau. Reviewed by Carol K. Coburn 154 
NiseilSansei: Shifting Japanese American Identities and Politics. 
By Jere Takahashi. Reviewed by William J. Clark 155 
Blackface, White Noise: Jewish Immigrants in the Hollywood Melting Pot. 
By Michael Rogin. Reviewed by David Desser 157 
Max Lerner: Pilgrim in the Promised Land. By Sanford Lakoff. 
Reviewed by Frank Warren 159 
Young Sidney Hook: Marxist and Pragmatist. By Christopher Phelps. 
Reviewed by Frank Warren 159 
The Talkies: American Cinema! s Transition to Sound, 1926-1931. 
By Charles Harpole. Reviewed by Gerald R. Butters, Jr 161 
Hollywood Renaissance: The Cinema of Democracy in the Era of Ford, 
Capra, and Kazan. By Sam Girgus. Reviewed by Gregory D. Black 162 
Writing Women's Communities: The Politics of Contemporary Multi-Genre 
Anthologies. By Cynthia G. Franklin. Reviewed by AnaLouise Keating 163 
Black Chant: Languages of African-American Postmodernism. By Aldon Lynn 
Nielsen. Reviewed by Julius E. Thompson 165 
Trade and the American Dream: A Social History of Postwar Trade Policy. 
By Susan Ariel Aaronson. Reviewed by Clyde Haulman 165 
118 
 Cancer from Beef: DES, Federal Food Regulation, and Consumer Confidence. 
By Alan I. Marcus. Reviewed by Keith Barbera 166 
Reel to Real: Race, Sex, and Class at the Movies. By bell hooks. 
Reviewed by Alvina E. Quintana 168 
Yo' Mama's Disfunktional: Fighting the Culture Wars in Urban America. 
By Robin D.G. Kelley. Reviewed by Herman Gray 169 
Shakespeare, the Movie: Popularizing the Plays on Film, TV, and Video. 
Edited by Lynda E. Boose and Richard Burt. Reviewed by 
Eric James Schroeder 170 
Dangerous Knowledge: The JFK Assassination in Art and Film. By Art Simon. 
Reviewed by Jill Talbot 171 
New Pioneers: The Back-to-the-Land Movement and the Search for a Sustainable 
Future. By Jeffery Jacob. Reviewed by Amanda Rees 172 
The New Age Movement in American Culture. By Richard Kyle. 
Reviewed by Robert Ellwood 173 
Editorial note: Book reviews are edited for typographical 
errors, and otherwise are printed as received. 
119 
 
 Reviews 
THE OPENING OF THE AMERICAN MIND: Canons, Culture, and History. By 
Lawrence W. Levine. Boston: Beacon Press. 1996. 
Lawrence W. Levine' s title announces itself as a counter-statement to Allan Bloom's 
The Closing of the American Mind and other similarly conservative or reactionary books. 
But what cannot be as obvious is Levine's formulation of his response through an analysis 
of cultural and historical change in the history of the American university. The result of 
that cultural/historical analysis corrects what Levine reveals as the shoddily-researched 
and thus mistaken outlines of American higher education which a number of conservatives 
advance. Levine's correction produces five remarkable points, among others. First, that 
the current political disputes concerning higher education are not new, but have existed 
for more than one hundred years. Second, that such disputes must be understood in terms 
of their historical circumstances, which include the fact that the United States has always 
been a multicultural, multiracial, multiethnic society. Third, that the "classical" univer­
sity, the loss of which Levine's opponents lament, is itself a product of its era's own 
"culture wars," which occurred earlier this century. Fourth, because universities serve the 
public, universities change as they respond to changing needs of that public. "College 
curricula," writes Levine, "do not exist apart from the culture in which they develop; they 
are products of that culture and both reflect and influence it" (67). Fifth, that while 
universities are functioning as they should, academicians must learn to communicate their 
roles more clearly to the general public. 
The Opening of the American Mind asserts that the strength of the American 
university tradition rests in its openness to change (90,101,110,112). Levine shows that 
curricular change, the strength of the American university, is represented in the variety of 
the canonical texts it has produced. The diversity of the canon, in turn, illustrates the 
university's dynamic role within a changing culture. Contrary to the nostalgia for an 
imagined fixed canon, "The only truly permanent element in the classical American canon 
was a belief in its timelessness" (78). Thus efforts to limit that openness are seen as attacks 
on the university's vital center, its ability to educate in service of a broad range of 
American cultural needs. 
121 
 Other points support and extend Levine's main ones and strengthen his analysis of 
openness in the American university. For example, countering the conservative critics' 
contention that Shakespeare is being lost from the current curriculum, Levine reveals that 
"Of the courses that 80 percent of the English departments [surveyed in 1990] insisted their 
majors take, the three most frequently required were survey courses in British literature, 
American literature, and Shakespearean drama" (24). Levine relates one of the more 
remarkable instances of conservatism's resistance to change in his summary of nineteenthcentury
curricular debates at Princeton and Yale. "During his inauguration as president of 
Princeton in 1854, John Maclean declared: 'We shall not aim at innovations. . . . [N]o 
chimerical experiments in education have ever had the least countenance here'" (39). On 
the other hand, in 1842 Brown University president Francis Wayland openly advocated 
change in order to make higher education available to children of "the merchant, the 
mechanic, the manufacturer" and to insure that Brown would realize its ideal as "a grand 
centre of intelligence to all classes and conditions of m e n . . . " (42). 
The Opening of the American Mind not only describes the historical tension between 
conservative and progressive forces in American higher education. It finally celebrates the 
purpose, health, and integrity of higher education in the United States. More, Levine's 
style exemplifies the clarity of exposition which itself would go far in countering 
conservative criticism of the American university, should more academics choose to 
follow it. 
Creighton University Greg Zacharias 
WRITTEN IN STONE: Public Monuments in Changing Societies. By Stanford Levinson. 
Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press. 1998. 
Mr. Levinson, Professor of Law at the University of Texas, is a cultural historian at 
heart who has written extensively about constitutionalism in the United States with 
particular reference to religion and literature. The title of his new and welcome work is 
somewhat misleading because it suggests far more comprehensive coverage than it 
actually contains. It concentrates primarily upon certain controversial symbols and 
monuments in the South, ones mainly arising from cherished sentiments about the Lost 
Cause, such as the Confederate Battle Rag that has been flown for many years over certain 
state capitols, the so-called Liberty Monument in New Orleans, and the Memorial to the 
Confederate Dead located on the grounds of the state capitol in Austin, Texas. Levinson 
explains his major concern in this way. 
Do we, as a society, have a duty to the past to continue to give pride 
of sacred place to monuments to our—and what one means by "our" 
is perhaps the central question of this essay—own "Lost Cause" of the 
Confederate States of America in spite of altogether persuasive 
arguments not only that this cause was racist at its core, but also that 
some of the specific monuments... leaving nothing to the imagination 
in terms of their racism? (32) 
Levinson justifies the title of his book, however, by interpolating judicious and 
fascinating comparisons with controversies (and their solutions) involving public monu­
ments to discredited causes in such places as Russia, Hungary, and Zimbabwe (formerly 
122 
 Rhodesia). He also serves up some deliriously ambiguous (and hence provocative) 
examples involving Fillmore Street in San Francisco and Captain John Mason, a figure 
from Connecticut's early history who helped massacre Pequot Indians in 1637. Written in 
Stone is anecdotally rich. But more important, because Levinson is so fair-minded— 
combining constitutional scruples with historical sensibilities—he judiciously weighs 
alternative solutions to problems raised by racist monuments that nonetheless expose and 
reflect important aspects of our past. His essential solution: remove them to less conspicu­
ous (and less offensive) locations, but do not destroy them. Make them museum relics 
rather than shrines. Levinson's stance places respect for the past above a strictly legalistic 
or politically correct position. 
Unfortunately, Written in Stone is capriciously documented. Citations are presented 
for some pieces of information but not for many others. Nevertheless, this book is 
potentially a marvelous teaching assignment: brief, eminently readable, intensely interest­
ing, and chock full of highly debatable issues whose ideal solutions are murkier than the 
Great Dismal Swamp. It can be used successfully in a whole array of introductory 
courses—and probably will. 
Cornell University Michael Kammen 
BORDER THEORY: The Limits of Culture Politics. Edited by Scott Michaelsen and 
David E. Johnson. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 1997. 
In the 1990s "borders" and "borderlands" have become among the most used and 
abused terms in literary and cultural criticism. Like other such buzzwords, popularity has 
broadened its meaning. Some now write of the "borders" dividing disciplines, racial 
identities, even genres of literature, as if each were fenced-off geographical frontiers, 
policed by oppressors and ripe for subversive transgression. The editors of Border Theory 
have mostly avoided this proliferation, and anchored their volume close to the Tex-Mex 
borderlands from which the buzzword arose. The collection is a response to books such as 
Gloria Anzaldua's Borderlands/La Frontera: The New Mestiza, Renato Rosaldo's Cul­
ture and Truth, and D. Emily Hicks' Border Writing: The Multidimensional Text. Several 
of the essays attack these scholars' trendy vision of borderlands as "a place of politically 
exciting hybridity, intellectual creativity, and moral possibility— the privileged locus of 
hope for a better world" (3). 
Russ Castronovo suggests that this Utopian vision of the U.S.-Mexico frontera 
betrays a debt to the weltering translatio impiri of the Age of Discovery, since both arose 
from a yearning "for fresh possibilities and innovative communities . . . the 'New World' 
and later the 'new' lands west of the Mississippi" (200). His essay turns to an earlier 
internal border, the Mason-Dixon line, to show how the slave narrative genre, which 
sought freedom by crossing this border, was appropriated by Southerners arguing in 
defense of slavery, and by nationalists seeking to preserve the union through sectional 
division. Castronovo asserts that '"Border theory' and the narratives of resistance and 
subversion that it supplies, does not travel well; it too readily formulates a perspective that 
overlooks the force and appeal of the nation-state" (198). 
Benjamin Alire Saenz, assistant professor of English at the University of Texas El 
Paso, offers a long autobiographical essay which puts the brakes on any notion that border 
theory has transformed intellectual life in the region. His course on Chicano literature 
enrolled no white males, he reports, and in another literature class a Chicano undergraduate 
123 
 declared "I don't read Gringo poets" (69). Saenz is reluctant to embrace the label Chicano, 
and bristles at the identity politics offered on the one hand by Richard Rodriguez, and on 
the other by Gloria Anzaldua, whom he accuses of "fetishiz[ing] Aztec and Indian culture," 
a strategy "not so different from Englishmen appropriating the 'classical' culture of the 
Ancient Greeks as their own" (85). Nonetheless, the influence of Anzaldua's mixing of 
critical, autobiographical and poetic discourses may explain why Saenz interleaves his 
essay with long passages from his graduate students' responses to the word Chicano, a 
presentation that proves somewhat tedious. 
The most entertaining essay is Louis Kaplan's "On the Border with the Pilgrim: 
Zigzags across a Chapl(a)in's Signature," which examines the 1923 silent film which 
involves the Tramp impersonating a chaplain and a convict, and ends with him running 
back and forth across the Texas-Mexico border, fleeing authorities from both sides. 
Kaplan's letterplay and puns in lines like: "Contra Bunyan's, this is the large-soled 
pilgrim's egress" (114) recalls the giddy nerdiness of the best deconstructionist writing. 
Two essays move north: Elaine Chang's to Vancouver for an analysis of Evelyn Lau' s 
Runaway: Diary of a Street Kid, which explores the underside of that booming Pacific Rim 
city; and Scott Michaelsen's "Resketching Anglo-Amerindian Identity Politics," which 
explores opposing visions of the Iroquois creation story by David Cusick, Henry Rowe 
Schoolcraft, and by contemporary Iroquois scholars. Two others, by Alejandro Lugo and 
David Johnson, move deeply into theory. A final word by Patricia Seed deploys math­
ematical concepts of limits and boundary values to further theorize a word and region 
which has seen too little critical thinking of the caliber found in this volume. 
University of Oregon Gordon M. S ay re 
NEW WORLDS FOR ALL: Indians, Europeans, and the Remaking of Early America. By 
Colin Calloway. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. 1997. 
In this compact study, Colin Calloway, a prolific and talented historian of American 
Indians, departs from common trends in the historiography of Native peoples in colonial 
American history in an attempt to tackle one of the perennial questions of the field: can the 
history of Indians be integrated with that of the colonizers without getting lost in the 
shuffle? Not "Indian history," and not the history of "Indian-white relations," Calloway 
describes his book as a collection of essays in which he underscores the fundamental na­
ture of cultural interaction to early American history (xiv). Although Calloway's work 
shows the influence of recent scholars of American Indian history, most notably James 
Axtell, James Merrell, and Richard White, he stakes out new ground for himself in this 
unique volume, an early entry in the "American Moment" series of the Johns Hopkins 
University Press. 
Organized topically rather than chronologically, Calloway brings his impressive 
research ethic to bear on key themes in the interaction between Indians and colonists 
throughout the area bounded by the modern United States from 1492 to 1800. Drawing on 
a massive evidentiary base, Calloway enlightens the reader on common and contrasting 
elements of the experiences of various groups of Native Americans with English, French, 
Spanish, Dutch, Russian, and Swedish intruders in North America. The chapters highlight 
key phenomena in which European settlers and resident Indians shared with, and 
transformed one another: disease, religion, trade, warfare, language, intermarriage, the 
environment, and settlement patterns. Within each chapter, illustrative evidence on the 
124 
 specific theme in question is provided from all points in the 1492-1800 time span. 
Eschewing footnotes, the author instead provides a detailed bibliographical essay cover­
ing all nine chapters, in which quotations are carefully attributed, and major interpretive 
works identified. 
Calloway is at his best in this book when he dispels and qualifies popular stereotypes 
of what have traditionally been regarded as key ingredients of Tndianness": the Plains 
horse culture (13), totem poles (49), tepees and wigwams (55), scalping (103), "halfbreeds"
(154), and the notion of Iroquois influence on the Constitution of the United States 
(187-88). The book provides an excellent baseline of information for students and 
generalists, while raising some provocative suggestions that should get specialists think­
ing. Why, for example, have we been so slow to comprehend the fundamental importance 
of migration to Native American population dynamics in the colonial period? Calloway's 
insightful chapter on the mobility of all peoples in colonial America points to new 
directions for future research. 
Calloway's decision to adopt a topical, rather than strictly chronological approach is 
refreshing and allows him to offer many vignettes in support of his essential argument: that 
Indians and Europeans interacted with one another on many different levels, and each 
changed the other in fundamental ways. The progression of these "snapshots," however, 
can be moderately disjointing. Reading the narrative, one veers from an incident in which 
Abenakis mockingly "moon" Giovanni de Verrazano's ships floating off the Maine coast 
in 1524 (45), to the more taciturn image of Mohawks translating the New Testament into 
their own language two-and-a-half centuries later (84), and back to the 1536 voyage of the 
St. Lawrence Iroquoian headman Donnacona to France (165). In his brief Conclusion, 
however, Calloway makes clear the unbalanced nature of the respective cultural transfor­
mations experienced by Indians and Europeans between 1492 and 1800. Both Indians and 
Europeans were altered by contact with one another, but the Indians changed in a more 
lasting and profound manner, both culturally and demographically. Nevertheless, 
Calloway's larger argument of "new worlds for all" successfully integrates the story of 
cultural interaction between Indians and Europeans in colonial North America into an 
accessible and highly readable narrative, while pointing out the fallacy of the long-held 
idea that Indians who adapted their lifestyles in order to survive were no longer truly 
"Indians." Ideal for classroom use, Calloway's book deserves a wide readership. 
University of Michigan Jon W. Parmenter 
JONATHAN EDWARDS ' S WRITINGS : Text, Context, Interpretation. Edited by Stephen 
J. Stein. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 1996. 
In June of 1994, some one hundred scholars of Jonathan Edwards convened at the 
University of Indiana for a three-day discussion of Edwards's writings. This book is a 
compilation of twelve of the papers delivered and discussed at that conference, and it is a 
very welcome addition to Edwards scholarship. Stephen Stein, one of the volume editors 
for the Yale Works of Jonathan Edwards and a member of that project's Editorial Board, 
not only convened the Indiana conference but also edited these essays. As Stein notes in 
the introduction, the distinguishing mark of this collection is its focus on Edwards's texts, 
an emphasis that apparently governed the 1994 conference. "In an age when academic are 
increasingly preoccupied with theoretical, deconstructive, and postmodern agendas, 
scholarship in the field of Edwards studies, with a few notable exceptions, has remained 
125 
 strikingly traditional in outlook. That may prove both an advantage and a disadvantage. On 
the positive side, it results in research publications that are relatively fee of jargon, not 
driven by scholarly fads, and readable by a general audience. On the negative side, this 
traditional caste may hinder conversation with others more venturesome, conversation 
from both parties might profit" (x). In my view, the Stein volume excels precisely because 
all twelve essays examine tests closely, each sharing discoveries from manuscript and 
printed sources from which the essay arguments are developed. In a climate when some 
critics argue that there are no texts, only "cultural contexts and cultural constructs" of 
language, literature, and theology, it is refreshing to examine a volume of recent American 
criticism that wholly avoids this pitfall. 
The editor's organizational strategy is straightforward and clearly explained. Part I, 
"Text: Integrating Unpublished manuscripts and Public Texts," contains four essays by 
younger scholars, all of whom have done remarkable work with the Edwards manuscripts 
and sermons and two of whom have produced extremely original and informative essays. 
Gerald McDermott's "The Deist Connection: Jonathan Edwards and Islam" (39-52), 
explores territory often neglected by Edwards critics, namely, the elusive question of the 
theologian's obvious contempt for both Deism and Islam. However, "McDermott links 
Edwards' s anti-Muslim views with a more pressing concern that occupied the cleric during 
the last decade of his life, namely, his defense of scriptural revelation against the suf­
ficiency of reason and against the notion that one is able to arrive at true knowledge of God 
and divine realties by natural means" (xii-xiii). Similarly, Kenneth Minkema shows how 
Edwards's attack on the Deists and his defense of the unity and authority of Biblical 
revelation governed his ambition to produce a "Harmony of the Old and New Testament." 
Minkema examines closely Miscellany 1069, "Types of the Messiah," (Works of 
Jonathan Edwards, Vol. 11) as proof of the theologian's intention to unify scriptural and 
natural modes of revelation. Like McDermott, Minkema utilizes both manuscript and 
published sources. 
Part II' s four essays, "interpreting Texts and Identifying Influences," are authored by 
more established Edwards scholars (Lucas, Stoever, Hall, and Proudfoot), and the focus 
here, while textually based, is on the relationship between Edwards's writings and those 
of other major religious figures, "The Legacy of Solomon Stoddard;" "Shepard, Edwards, 
and the Identification of True Godliness;" "Did Berkeley Influence Edwards?" The 
clearest exposition here is William Stoever's detailed analysis of the use that Edwards 
made of Thomas Shepard's Parable of the Ten Virgins Unfolded (1660). Possibly the most 
controversial in this section will be Richard Hall's chapter "Did Berkeley Influence 
Edwards? Their Common Critique of Moral Sense Theory." (100-122). As Stein notes, 
"The usual way of engaging this question is to focus on their respective commitments to 
philosophical idealism. But taking his lead from a recent volume by Edwin Gaustad, Hall 
argues that the place to look for Berkeley's influence is in Edwards's posthumous 
publication, The Nature of True Virtue (1165)" Again, textual analysis is foregrounded by 
Wayne Proudfoot in his examination of Edwards's Treatise Concerning Religious 
Affections (1746). 
The focus of Part Ill's essays is the "nature and constituency of the Edwardsian 
tradition. Who were the authentic successors of Edwards?" The four essays represent a 
scholarly mix, from Douglas Sweeney's "Nathaniel William Taylor and the Edwardsian 
Tradition: A Reassessment" to Joseph Conforti's "Edwards A. Park and the Creation of 
New England Theology." "Sweeney makes his case by arguing that the narrow doctrinal 
definition of the Edwardsian tradition needs to be scrapped in favor of a definition of 
126 
 Edwardsianism as a multifaceted 'theological culture.'" Clearly the most "theoretical" of 
the volume's essays, it challenges received opinion concerning Edwards's legacy in 
American culture, and it is balanced by Joseph Conforti's account of the work of Edwards 
Amasa Park, "whom he identifies as 'the last major Edwardsian Consistent Calvinist' and 
the one who by his historical studies of the tradition gave rise to a historical reality that still 
is the object of intense scholarly discussion and debate" (xvi). None of the four essays 
addresses the Edwards legacy posited by Perry Miller's argument in "From Edwards to 
Emerson" that American Transcendentalism owes its foundations to English and German 
Romanticism and to Edwards's assimilation of natural and scriptural revelation. To the 
extent that it ignores the literary and philosophical influences in the Edwards tradition, this 
final section omits a significant element in Edward's studies. However, the Stein volume 
is an important and well conceived contribution to contemporary Edwards scholarship, 
and it reminds us of the vitality and intelligence that may be brought to close textual 
analysis at a time when the profession seems to have lost much of its focus and has 
difficulty clarifying its objectives. Stephen Stein et al have done much to restore 
confidence that valuable intellectual work is alive and well in the academy, and that 
conferences are still worth attending. If one is inclined to despair, with Prufrock, that "in 
the halls, the scholars come and go/ talking of Derrida and Foucault," the Stein volume is 
a welcome, and healthy, antidote. 
University of Massachusetts at Amherst Mason I. Lowance, Jr. 
CONVERSING BY SIGNS: Poetics of Implication in Colonial New England Culture. By 
Robert Blair St. George. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. 1998. 
In Conversing by Signs, Robert Blair St. George, a folklorist, brings ethnographic 
methods of investigating local poetics to the study of colonial New England culture. He 
uses an approach to poetics that covers a variety of symbolic forms and communicative 
processes, including language, objects, movement, and faith. He resists limiting himself 
to any particular interpretive approach, which is particularly appropriate for the examina­
tion of a culture, which, as the author notes, "was one in which the visual vied with the 
verbal for semiotic authority, even as it labored to hold the mythic weight of text and image 
in perfect equipoise" (3). 
People in colonial New England lived in a densely metaphoric world. The sermons 
they heard, St. George shows, and the Bible verses they read aloud, reflected the layers of 
meanings they shaped on a daily basis. But he also addresses the mundane. Ordinary 
houses were modeled on the perfect geometry of heaven, he suggests, and may have shown 
how easily that ordained perfection could be toppled, when they were attacked, as they 
were during the Era of the American Revolution. Farms, fields, and town plans, he adds, 
were no less burdened with hidden significance. 
Many historians will likely dismiss—or at least minimize—the importance of St. 
George's concerns with indirect expression and intertextual reference in their study of 
colonial New England. St. George argues that they should be included because "they make 
a productive mess of chronology" (6). Often, he argues, one "culture" simply did not give 
way quite so quickly or completely to the other. The self-denying strain of Puritan piety 
often pointed to as representing 17th century New England culture, for example, did not 
give way to the enlightenment of the 18th century for decades. The two coexisted, even if 
the former existed increasingly in the shadow of the latter. This, of course, is not news to 
127 
 historians, but historians may nevertheless find St. George's analysis of 17th and 18th 
century architecture an interesting way to make the point. 
By way of another example, St. George reminds readers—again not really breaking 
new ground—that the worlds of metaphysics and the market were never quite separate in 
colonial New England. "The commodification of culture asserted by market forces," he 
writes, "was always incomplete and bore an enchantment as intensely metaphysical as any 
witchcraft narrative" (380-381 ). Commerce remained symbolically tied to the metaphysi­
cal world of death, rebirth, and eternal life, and, the author adds, presented a window on 
the alluring possibility of transcending oneself through contract and exchange. In sum, St. 
George adds his voice—and other interesting bits of evidence—to those [e.g. Christine 
Leigh Heyrman, Commerce and Culture (1984)] who have as of late challenged the maxim 
that when Puritan communities encountered commercial capitalism, Puritanism lost, 
leading inexorably to the decline of Puritan community—the declension model of New 
England history. 
The reader should be warned that Conversing by Signs consists of four lengthy 
chapters, each divided into numerous shorter sections, which are in turn broken down into 
fragmentary topics that relate to the larger subject of the chapter. At times, such 
organization may give the impression that the entire work is patched together and the 
relationship of its many parts coincidental. In the end, however, while the author's 
conclusions concerning colonial New England culture are not entirely new, his method­
ology and the sources upon which he draws reward the reader's patience. 
Creighton University Bryan F. Le Beau 
CONFLICTING PATHS: Growing Up in America. By Harvey J. Graff. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press. 1995. 
THE CHILDREN'S CIVIL WAR. By James Marten. Chapel Hall: University of North 
Carolina Press. 1998. 
The past several years have seen a dramatic increase in the scholarly interest directed 
toward children: their historical circumstances, their culture, and the multiple meanings 
which childhood has embraced over time. The Chronicle of Higher Education (8-7-98) 
features a front-page story on "Booming Interest in 'Children's Studies'" and a similar 
story, "The Children's Hour," appeared in the Washington Post (11-13-98). National 
Public Radio's "Talk of the Nation" hosted child-study scholars in a December 1998 
broadcast. The new electronic discussion H-Childhood reflects the interdisciplinary scope 
of childhood studies as well as bringing together scholars from across the globe. The two 
books reviewed here represent significant, but very different, contributions to this rapidlyexpanding
field, and through their impressive use of under-utilized sources, illustrate how 
invisible children's lives have been in the narrative of the American past. 
James Marten's thoroughly researched and engagingly written study of how the 
Civile War affected children's activities, culture, and emotions stands as one of the most 
exciting studies to emerge in the last dozen years. Using memoirs, autobiography, juvenile 
periodicals and schoolbooks, toy collections, published and unpublished letters, and 
newspapers, Marten weaves a compelling story of how actively children experienced this 
war, and how long they remained marked by it. "Children experienced everything the war 
threw at northerners and southerners," he writes, "danger and hardship, exhilaration and 
128 
 loss, and enhanced opportunities and crushing responsibilities" (185). Building on his 
previous Civil War research, Marten incorporates knowledge of other childhood studies, 
and especially childhood trauma, to provide nuance and depth to this research. 
In Chapter Two, the author provides the definitive work to date on children's 
literature and school texts in the Civil War Era, including numerous short-lived Confed­
erate periodicals and schoolbooks. Of particular interest are the Freedmen's Bureau 
publications designed to teach politics, manners, and obedience, as well as literacy, to the 
newly-emancipated African-American. In fact, he found so much information that he has 
edited Lessons of War: the Civil War in Children's Magazines (Wilmington, DE: 
Scholarly Resources, 1999) as well. 
Another chapter explores the impact of the absence of fathers and brothers on Civil 
War children and also examines the role that children played in the lives of these absent 
fathers including a poignant examination of father's grieving for children who died while 
they were away and the investment that many men had in being good, though absent, 
parents. Marten illustrates how, although all children tend to conceptualize the world into 
good and evil, right and wrong, the Civile War's immediacy exacerbated this tendency to 
concertize beliefs. Children's actual involvement in fund-raising (e.g., booths at the 
Sanitary Fairs), bandage rolling, and letter writing probably enhanced their emotional 
investment in the outcome of this war. 
In his final chapter, Marten shows that "their war did not end when the armies laid 
down their weapons," (190) as he examines the writing and political activity of such Civil 
War children who became prominent authors as Henry Grady, Thomas Nelson Page, Sarah 
Orne Jewett, and Charles Waddell Chesnutt. For researchers, Marten's bibliography alone 
is worth the price of the book. James Marten has taken a topic ignored by both Civil War 
historians and historians of childhood and crafted an engaging, masterful, nuanced, and 
readable study that will not quickly leave the reader's mind or heart. 
Harvey Graff is no newcomer to childhood studies; he has been teaching and writing 
about the history of childhood for a least a dozen years. Conflicting Paths represents both 
his critique of previous synthetic interpretations and his own typology for understanding 
the processes children go through in becoming adults in America. His schema of 
"conflicting paths" is based on a model of diversity and conflict. Having established this 
theoretical framework in the first chapter, the bulk of Graffs book contains mini-profiles 
of child experiences drawn from an extensive reading of personal memoirs. Though 
making no claim for a scientifically-collected sample, Graff argues that this broad reading 
enabled him to discern several dominant "paths" for growing up in each of the five eras 
he studied, although the "paths" have no fixed chronological boundaries. He delineates 
these paths as "traditional," "transitional," "female," and "emergent," although concrete 
definitions or characteristics are few. For example, he describes the "transitional" path as 
one marked by "discontinuity, uncertainty, shifting expectations, and shifting locations," 
and goes on to say that these paths "occupy the ground that lies, materially and 
metaphorically, between traditional and newly emergent paths, between apparent stability 
and continuity on the one hand and manifest opportunities and new rhythms or schedules 
on the other" (30). 
Such a model tells us more abut variable temperaments among people than it does 
about children's lives, culture, emotions, ethical systems, or the historical context in which 
they lived. Having a separate category for girls' experience denies the myriad ways in 
which women share the desires and burdens of mainstream culture. According to the 
author, "emergent" paths lean toward "the modern understanding of growing up, a picture 
129 
 blurring at its edges with the transitional path" (32). His model tends to disguise the impact 
of region, class, and ethnicity on the growing up experience. 
The bulk of the book (Chapter Two-Six) present profiles of children whose experi­
ences seem to support one of the four "paths." Herein lies both the strength and the 
weakness of Conflicting Paths. These individual profiles, often a mere two or three 
paragraphs long, can only provide self-interpreted experiences, much as a patient describ­
ing symptoms. Certainly the mere descriptive is helpful in recreating historical meaning, 
but without the interpretive lens of the historian, the reader gains little meaning or insight. 
Other than Graffs "paths," nothing links the dozens and scores of profiles to each other 
or to their social and cultural context. Minority and ethnic profiles are absent because the 
author found too little data to fit them into his model. Thus rather than using the lacunae 
to illustrate the contours of American society or culture, he perpetuates the middle-class, 
white bias of most childhood studies. For a book based on personal narratives, the text has 
no narrative strategy at all. As a ten-year research project based on approximately 500 
personal narratives, Graffs effort is impressive. One could only wish that the resulting 
monograph interfaced more with current studies of American childhood and were more 
reader-friendly. 
Rhodes College Gail S. Murray 
THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY: Reflections on Personal Identity in Early America. 
Edited by Ronald Hoffman, Medial Sobel, and Fredrika J. Teute. Chapel Hill: University 
of North Carolina Press (for the Omohundro Institute of Early American History and 
Culture). 1997. 
The editors of Through a Glass Darkly have collected for publication thirteen papers 
presented at a conference sponsored by the Omohundro Institute of Early American 
History and Culture in 1993. The papers draw on a variety of disciplines—history, 
anthropology, sociology, psychology, literary criticism, material culture, and perfor­
mance theory—to explore the construction and representation of self in early America. 
The authors examine dreams, diaries, furniture, clothing, folkstories, acts of murder, 
penitence, and suicide, and gendered responses to pain. They include whites, Native 
Americans, and blacks in an attempt to explore the ways people defined themselves, the 
meanings of those measures of self-definition, and what the process of self-definition and 
the categories it employed reveal about the character of that society and how it changed 
over time. 
Through a Glass Darkly is a fascinating collection of essays that continues a shift 
among scholars away from the aggregate studies based in institutions and demography of 
the new social history to an emphasis on individual life experiences and how they could 
be probed for deeper meaning—seeking meaning for society from patterns embedded in 
individual lives. Particularly helpful are the contributions of Greg Dening—brief introduc­
tions to the collection and to each of its three sections—which tie the volume together in 
a thoughtful and integrated manner. 
The title, Through a Glass Darkly, comes from Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians. 
The Christian Corinthians were marginalized in their own Hellenistic society, uncertain 
as to their future. Recognizing that uncertainty, Paul told them that it was the human 
condition to be uncertain, but that they were on the edge of something better, and that they 
should live by that hope and find their identity in what was to come. Uncertainty, Dening 
130 
 argues—"edginess" or "liminality," to use his other terms—is the paramount feeling of the 
human condition: "The self is always on the edge, always contingent, dependent on all the 
exchanges with otherness around. Identity is an appreciation that T am not now what T 
was then" (3). Liminality also serves to tie all thirteen essays together into a largely 
coherent whole. 
The editors divide Through a Glass Darkly into three parts. The first, "Histories of 
Self," contain narratives of "the self-describing" in early America. They are written with 
a sense of the process in, and dialogic nature of, culture. More specifically, authors James 
Merrell, Mary Beth Norton, T. H. Breen, Alan Taylor, and Donna Merwick address what 
one author describes as an "unintelligible self," communal definitions of gendered 
identity, the force of public opinion during the final years of slavery, and episodes of 
murder and penitence and suicide. The second section, "Texts of Self," offers readings of 
the ways that selves in early America were represented in writing, in stories told, and in 
material things. Mechal Sobel, Rhys Isaac, Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, and Kenneth Lockridge 
add slaves to the mix and examine folkstories, diaries, a cupboard, and the construction of 
genteel identity. The final section, titled "Reflections on Defining Self," presents efforts 
"to fulfill the historian's obligation not merely to tell the story of self-defining but to 
explain it" (6). Authors Philip Greven, Elaine Forman Crane, Richard White, and W. 
Jeffrey Bolster examine the formative experiences of childhood, the "defining force" of 
pain, the construction of self among Native Americans on the "middle ground," and the 
making of selves among black sailors. 
Creighton University Bryan F. Le Beau 
A TRUE REPUBLICAN: The Life of Paul Revere. By Jayne E. Triber. Amherst: 
University of Massachusetts Press. 1998. 
With publication of his poem, "Paul Revere's Ride," in January 1861, Henry 
Wadsworth Longfellow created an enduring symbol of America's revolutionary ideals in 
the person of Paul Revere, a daring horseman who, "with a cry of defiance and not fear," 
rallied his countrymen in defense of liberty. The poet did not explain what attracted Revere 
to the Revolutionary cause, how Revere interpreted the republican principles of the 
Revolution, or how those principles shaped his life after his famous ride on the night of 
April 18, 1775. Those are the questions Jayne Triber sets out to answer in A True 
Republication, and answer them she does in a book that compliments the still classic 
biography by Esther Forbes, Paul Revere and the World He Lived In (1942), and the more 
recent study by David Hackett Fischer, Paul Revere's Ride (1994). 
Triber's work is part intellectual biography, part social analysis, and that bifurcated 
approach is particularly useful in trying to understand the political ideas of an upwardly 
mobile patriot and master artisan in the era of the American Revolution. The Revere that 
emerges from Triber's analysis is both a proud and ambitious person whose desire for 
prosperity, independence, and social distinction drew him to the republican ideals of 
liberty and equality of opportunity based on individual merit and a man who fervently 
believed in the necessity of virtue—the sacrifice of private interest to the public good— 
in order to sustain republicanism. 
Revere's story chronicles the historical events and cultural developments that 
transformed the American colonies into the new republic. Revere's political awakening, 
Triber shows, occurred in the mid-1760s following passage of the Stamp Act of 1765. His 
131 
 opposition to the act led to the first of several instances in which the master artisan turned 
his skills to propaganda in the rebel cause by engraving "A View of The Year 1765." His 
best known effort in this regard would be "The Bloody Massacre," which he produced 
following the Boston Massacre of March 1770. 
Revere soon established himself as a reliable member of the Sons of Liberty, which 
in turn led to his being used increasingly as a courier of news between Committees of 
Correspondence in New England and the southern colonies and as an intelligence agent 
behind British lines in occupied Boston. Thus his being called upon for his "midnight ride" 
to Lexington and Concord. Revere gained prominence in Boston political circles, but his 
artisan status, Triber argues, prevented him from entering the ranks of its leadership with 
the likes of John and Sam Adams and Joseph Warren. Revere's leadership skills were to 
be exercised among his fellow artisans and in his lodge of Freemasons. 
Revere prospered after the war, and he continued to be involved in public affairs if 
not ever to hold public office. His support for ratification of the U. S. Constitution—as a 
frame of government "well calculated to secure the liberties, protect the property, and 
guard the rights of the citizens of America"—helped attract much needed support in the 
hard fought battle over ratification in Massachusetts. His support for the Federalist Party, 
Triber writes, signaled his wish to stand publicly with those "who shared his hopes for the 
future along with his abiding concern over the self-interest and lack of honor that were 
infesting the republic" (157). 
Creighton University Bryan F. Le Beau 
WOMEN IN THE AMERICAN THEATRE: Actresses and Audiences, 1790-1870. By 
Faye E. Dudden. New Haven: Yale University Press. 1994. 
Authoritative and challenging, this volume makes a significant contribution to the 
field of American studies and American theater. It is assiduously researched, lucidly 
written, and persuasively argued. In this book, author Faye E. Dudden provides new 
insights into the relations among gender, popular culture, and American society as she 
explores the various ways women were involved in the American theater—as actresses, 
managers, playwrights, and audiences—from the earliest years of the republic to the days 
just after the Civil War. 
Theater, as a quintessential public activity, has traditionally been male-dominated. In 
early American society, the women who associated themselves with the theater jeopar­
dized their and their families' reputations and often had to defend themselves against social 
and religious biases. However, despite its obvious drawbacks, the theater was one 
profitable area of enterprise open to women. The vocational possibilities of the stage 
profession afforded women the opportunity to receive a comparatively good salary, to 
compete with men on an equal basis of talent and public appeal, and even reach positions 
of management in the theater. On the other hand, by engaging in a profession that was so 
loudly and frequently condemned, female performers had to relinquish the most important 
attributes of 'True Womanhood' by which a woman was judged and appraised in society. 
Ever since women first appeared onstage they have been associated with immorality and 
sexuality. Dudden argues that the woman who presents herself in public is inherently 
liable, whatever her own intent, to become the object of male sexual fantasy and 
voyeuristic pleasure. Acting is a particularly acute case of the general phenomenon of a 
woman being reduced to sexual object. 
132 
 One of the great strengths of the book is that it blends vivid biographical sketches of 
female performers and managers with a social history of early American theater paying 
special attention to the contradictory possibilities that it offered women. Starting with 
American theater in the 1790s, Dudden attempts to explain how entertainment became so 
intensely commercialized, how it came to be so thoroughly controlled by men, and how 
it began routinely to display women's bodies for visual pleasure. Women in the American 
Theatre looks closely at the most significant historical developments that transformed 
early American theater from a predominantly aural experience in the late eighteenth 
century into a more systematic, profit-seeking, all-male enterprise in the nineteenth 
century, which eventually led to the objectification and commodification of women in 
the theater. 
According to Dudden, American theater in the early years of the republic—marginal, 
provincial, and disreputable though it was—offered women the unique opportunity to 
combine remunerative work with marriage and family as well as air bold talk about gender 
and republican politics. In the years between 1790 and 1830, there was more attention 
given on stage to women's voices than to their bodies. Although a pretty face and a comely 
figure were appreciated, early actresses were particularly admired for their enunciatory 
skills. However, the expansion of public life in the nineteenth century, due to urbanization 
and the industrial revolution, brought about a number of changes that greatly affected the 
entertainment market and encouraged the emergence of a purely commercialized popular 
entertainment that took to the stage a mass audience, catered principally to men ' s eyes, and 
put women performers at increased risk. Dudden traces the beginnings of these changes 
in the 1830s when Thomas Hamblin became the manager of the Bowery Theater in New 
York and took a critical turn towards visual rather than aural pleasure. Hamblin profited 
himself by exploiting young women performers and playwrights both professionally and 
sexually. This new emphasis on the visual, on the display of women's bodies on stage, had 
grave implications for women since they themselves were now liable to be taken as visual/ 
sexual objects. The triumph of the visual continued well into the nineteenth century with 
the appearance of the "model artist" shows in the 1840s that offered men the chance to ogle 
women's bodies dressed in tights, as well as with the success of the "leg shows," The Black 
Crook and Mazeppa. Dudden claims that visual entertainment pushed the objectification 
inherent in stage representation a step further, into commodification, as it converted 
women's bodies into a realizable asset. 
Dudden's Women in the American Theatre provides a provocative discussion about 
what it meant to be a woman in early American theater in a convincing, able and thoroughly 
engaging manner. The book should be of interest to general readers, students and scholars 
working in women's studies and early American theater. 
Aristotle University of Thessalonki Zoe Detsi 
HEART VERSUS HEAD: Judge-Made Law in Nineteenth-Century America. By Peter 
Karsten. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. 1997. 
Peter Karsten, a professor of History at the University of Pittsburgh, has written a 
truly distinguished book, one that will continue to inform the debate about the history of 
American law for decades to come. Karsten writes with clarity, grace, and wit at the same 
time that he provocatively analyzes the extraordinary range of materials that he has 
combed. The result is a truly original and singular contribution to the history of nineteenthcentury
American law. 
133 
 Karsten directly challenges the arguments of Morton Horwitz and his acolytes that 
the development of American law in the nineteenth century resulted from pro-business 
decisions made by judges. Rather, he insists that the central argument during these years 
was not over the efficient subsidization of business through the law, but instead it was 
about the conflict between a "jurisprudence of the heart," which exhibited a willingness 
to alter harsh rules when they were unfair, and a "jurisprudence of the head," which 
emphasized a strict adherence to precedent, no matter the consequences. This latter view, 
which Karsten ably explores, suggests that legal historians have given too little attention 
to the persistence of English common law rules and to the tenaciousness with which judges 
clung to their roles as independent interpreters rather than makers of the law. Karsten 
argues that gradually the tradition of the heart triumphed over that of the head, producing 
a decided change in American law. 
That change, however, was fundamentally different from the one described by 
Horwitz. The shift in American judge-made law away from English precedent benefitted 
those persons harmed by the rapid industrialization of the American economy, not 
corporations and business. Horwitz claimed that American judges accommodated new 
forms of capital by crafting legal rules that indirectly subsidized corporations and placed 
much of the costs on the persons harmed by change, such as workers in factories and 
passengers on steamboats and trains. Rather, Karsten insists that American judges when 
they did agree to change the law of property, contract, and tort almost always did so in ways 
that benefitted plaintiffs suing corporations. According to Karsten, " 'the poor, ' 'the weak, ' 
common laborers, and children were better off under the rules of the common law and 
equity by the 1890s than they had been in the 1790s because of judicial innovations" (294). 
Karsten achieves this insight, in part, because he has painted on a far larger 
geographical canvas than did Horwitz. Karsten finds that in the Northeast, where Horwitz 
concentrated his analysis, tradition-minded judges were far more numerous, although 
even there they acted with a great deal more sympathy for plaintiffs than Horwitz 
discovered. However, by pushing his analysis South, West, and ultimately to the Pacific, 
Karsten reveals a rich process of legal experimentation, almost all of which favored labor 
over capital. 
Karsten's explanation for the populist and pro-plaintiff stance of many judges rests 
more on speculation than a finished analysis of the evidence. That is, what Karsten reports 
he cannot altogether explain. What he does do brilliantly, however, is to offer a variety of 
suggestive insights: procedural reforms that favored plaintiffs, the sweeping trend toward 
the popular election of appellate court judges, and the powerful impact of religion on both 
judges personally and the culture as a whole. The last of these is especially provocative, 
since it fits nicely with work historians of American religion, such as Nathan Hatch, who 
find a growing concern within American religion for equity, fairness, and individual 
conscience during these years. 
This is a fine book, one that adds significantly to our understanding of nineteenthcentury
American law at the same time that it provocatively, wisely, and effectively 
challenges the existing literature. 
The Ohio State University Kermit L. Hall 
134 
 INVENTING NEW ENGLAND: Regional Tourism in the Nineteenth Century. By Dona 
Brown. Washington and London: Smithsonian Institution Press. 1995. 
Inventing New England is an illuminating exploration of New England's developing 
tourist industry. Brown's analysis focuses on the market relations of a regional industry 
that commodified tourist experiences of New England landscape, sharpened class divi­
sions among vacationers in search of summer retreats and diversions, and sold mythic 
versions of an "Old New England" steeped in a reassuring history of racial "purity." At the 
heart of Brown's study are six portraits of tourist sites and practices. These include 
excursions after romantic landscapes in the White Mountains, especially in Crawford's 
Notch whose developing hotel industry Brown discusses; Martha's Vineyard's Wesleyan 
Grove, a tent city for Methodist revivalists that became in the 1850s and 60s a carefully 
secularized community of middle class cottagers; and the promotion of "farm vacations" 
by a Vermont Board of Agriculture seeking to invigorate a declining segment of the state's 
economy and to reclaim prestige for farm life. 
Brown's analysis is particularly attuned to the ways tourism exposed class lines 
among vacationing Americans. Through a survey of Bureau of Agriculture documents and 
the newspapers of Vermont farming communities, Brown demonstrates that transactions 
between host farmers and their summer boarders often involved ticklish negotiations of 
class identity. Collating title deeds to the cottages of Wesleyan Grove with the city 
directories of the vacationers' winter homes (Hartford, New Bedford, Fall River) Brown 
draws the portrait of an artisanal group "poised at the edge of the middle class." Her 
discussion of the elite Bostonians who summered in southern Maine reveals a definition 
of the "Old New England" to which they retreated as predicated on the exclusion of ethnic 
Americans and "excursionists"—that is, working class tourists travelling on discounted 
round trip fares. Brown recalls that Thomas Bailey Aldrich, the genteel novelist whose 
memories of his boyhood Portsmouth set the tone for much Gilded Age nostalgia about the 
region, was a vocal anti-immigrationist. 
Indeed, Brown's chapters are persuasive and engaging because they make wide use 
of the imaginative literature of the region and period. Her treatment of the Bostonians in 
Maine draws largely from the fiction and the lived summer experience of William Dean 
Howells who, from his beloved retreat at Kittery Point, observed his privileged neighbors 
with an ambivalence born of his own egalitarian politics. Brown's section on Nantucket, 
where class tensions between natives and summer people were submerged beneath a 
manufactured and anti-modernist cult of "quaintness," is illustrated through reference to 
Edward Bellamy's near-forgotten novel, Six to One: a Nantucket Idyll Edith Wharton's 
1917 novel Summer appears pointedly in Brown's discussion of the institution of Old 
Home Weeks in many small New England communities where nostalgia for rural 
simplicity was marketed to urbanités. Brown is especially conversant with female local 
color writers of New England, like Jewett, Rose Terry Cooke, Elizabeth Stuart Phelps, and 
Celia Thaxter. These lend special point and finish to Brown's analysis. Inventing New 
England is a most valuable study of a familiar terrain, and of the industry that created there 
"a mythic region called Old New England—rural, preindustrial, and ethnically 'pure'— 
a reverse image of all that was most unsettling in late nineteenth-century urban life." 
Lake Forest College Benjamin Goluboff 
135 
 MELVILLE'S CITY: Literary and Urban Form in Nineteenth-Century New York. By 
Wyn Kelley. New York: Cambridge University Press. 1996. 
This book's subtitle appropriately signals that its subject is Melville's relationship to 
the urban through the qualities and terminology pertaining to one particular city—the 
one in which he lived for most of his adult life after returning from his years at sea. Kelley 
uses the facts and implications of nineteenth-century New York history to support 
historicized readings of Melville's works, even the sea fiction, where she finds a 
significant nineteenth-century dialectic concerning urban form and the literary forms used 
by authors to handle the cultural problems of the growing, changing, stimulating, and 
threatening city of New York. 
Focusing on four metaphors or "cultural representations," of urban form: the Capital, 
the Labyrinth, the City of Man and the City of God, Kelley also chooses four literary forms 
by means of which authors dealt with urban form. They are the spectator sketch, the 
sensationalistic novel of the labyrinthine city, the domestic and sentimental novel, and the 
narrative of Old World travel. Analyzing these literary forms in their Melvillean avatars, 
from his first book to his last, Kelley argues that Melville's "literary practices... borrow 
their distinctive coloring from the urban culture he lived in and represented in his fiction 
and poetry." She concludes that in these practices he expresses his own ambivalence about 
New York and what it represented. 
From the spectator narrations in the early novels, through the labyrinths evoked in 
White-Jacket and Pierre, to the references in Billy Budd, Sailor citing "Cain's city" and 
"citified man," Kelley perceptively highlights and interprets the urban contexts in 
Melville's prose and poetry. Her contrasts and comparisons with popular "labyrinth" 
fiction by George Lippard, E. Z. C. Judson, and George Foster are important to readings 
of "Bartleby, the Scrivener," The Confidence Man, and other works. She extends the 
argument of other recent criticism that the urban, the local, the political, were as much parts 
of Melville's life and work as they were for other, less skilled and less ambiguous authors. 
Kelley's expertise on Melville and her sophistication in reading him are fine, though 
her thesis seems slippery at times. Some interpretations may wrinkle the reader's brow 
with unanswered questions or desire for more justification. Preponderantly, however, 
Melville ' City is a rich though necessarily narrow addition to the growing critical literature 
on the role of the urban in nineteenth-century writing. It is perhaps even more valuable as 
an excavation of the layered and complex site called Melville. 
University of Kansas Haskell Springer 
THE TRIALS OF ANTHONY BURNS: Freedom and Slavery in Emerson's Boston. By 
Albert J. von Frank. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. 1998. 
In 1854, Anthony Burns, an escaped slave from Richmond, was seized and tried in 
Boston under the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850. The antislavery forces in the city recognized 
the improbability of winning Burns' freedom in a court of law; after all, the last runaway 
slave, Thomas Sims, had been returned in 1851 after a ruling by Lemuel Shaw that seemed 
to guarantee the state's acceptance of the federal statute and, as some abolitionists put it, 
the submission of Massachusetts to the "Slave Power." A meeting organized at Faneuil 
Hall galvanized a crowd to storm the Court House in an attempt to free Burns: the attempt 
136 
 failed and one guard was killed, leading to the indictment on both state and federal charges 
against several people, including Thomas Wentworth Higginson, that were later dropped— 
probably because the forces of "law and order" wanted no more martyrs in the abolitionist 
cause. As expected, Burns was finally remanded back into slavery by the presiding judge. 
In his preface, Albert von Frank recounts that his initial motive for examining this rich 
case was to assess how Transcendentalism, "the liberal, emancipatory ideas I admired in 
Emerson and his associates," played out on the terrain of slavery—how, and indeed 
whether, idealism was effective in the world of politics and courts (xiii). Von Frank's 
exhaustive research leads him not just to a belief in Transcendentalism's real-world 
efficacy but in its virtual identification with the very concept of "revolution." "Revolu­
tion," after all, involves the constitution of a radically different social body; and in the 
debate over slavery it was Emersonian idealism that underwrote abolitionists' conviction 
that the U.S. government must be re-constructed if all Americans—of all races—were to 
regain their freedom. 
Despite von Frank's intent to test the potency of ideas, he recreates the Burns case in 
a manner both meticulously concrete and dramatic—including a portentous chapter, for 
instance, on a solar eclipse that occurred only two days after Burns was arrested: '"Hung 
be the heavens in black!'" wrote Charles Sumner (51). Von Frank fully develops the 
dramatis personae in the case and tells a thrilling story, culminating in Richard Henry 
Dana's inspired defense of Burns and Edward Greely Loring's deflated and mechanical 
judgment that the law gave him no choice but to return the fugitive slave. It is precisely this 
tension, represented by Dana and Loring, that lies behind—that coheres and impels—the 
events that unfolded in Boston in 1854 in von Frank's carefully crafted retelling. On the 
one hand, men like Loring succumbed to the grinding power of the law; on the other hand, 
antislavery advocates aspired to surpass and remake that law. Over and over again, von 
Frank's abolitionists, heeding the absolute idealism of Emerson, insisted that freedom was 
commitment to a higher law, demanding a constant self-making and corollary worldmaking.
Subordination to a reified law that was taken as given made slaves of all people. 
Thus Loring, in his decision to return Burns, intoned that "'Whether the statute is a harsh 
one or not, it is not for us to determine'"—just as Shaw in the Sims case argued that because 
slavery pre-existed the Constitution, it was therefore "'not responsible for the origin or 
continuance of Slavery'" ; presumably Shaw too was not responsible for temporizing with 
freedom and justice when he followed the Constitution is accepting slavery (201). Where 
Emerson became essential to the fight against slavery, then, was in his uncompromising 
insistence that one must not slavishly follow the law, eschewing responsibility for it and 
for oneself, but that one must instead plant oneself "indomitably on the truth, defying 
custom, circumstance, and the whole world besides" (261). In such a way, as von Frank 
puts it, does Transcendentalism "deployed as antislavery, become revolution" (261). 
Emerson, von Frank concludes, fundamentally influenced the abolitionist move­
ment: his ideas motivated all those men, from the rabble-rousing Higginson to the lawyerly 
Dana, who fought for Burns' (and their own) freedom. But a possibility for change (if not 
revolution) that von Frank raises at the opening of his book remains a spectral challenge 
to the efficacy of idealism, however embodied it might be in tangible action: that challenge 
is the power of incremental, pragmatic, and institutional change from within—rarely 
cataclysmic in its results but productive nonetheless. Indeed, while Dana raised principled 
objections to the constitutionality of the Fugitive Slave Law in his defense of Burns, he also 
worked within the rubric of that law—trying to challenge those witnesses for the claimant 
who testified that Burns was the runaway slave in question; this involved Dana's arguing 
137 
 that Burns was not a runaway slave, even though his very importance to the antislavery 
movement necessitated that he be a runaway slave. It was these arguments about Burns' 
identity that Loring took most seriously. Most ironically, Burns was finally "freed" when 
his Boston friends bought him—a direct challenge to abolitionist ideals about owning 
humans that haunted many a philanthropic purchaser and many a freed slave (famously, 
Harriet Jacobs). It is impossible to read this book without realizing that Burns' freedom 
depended on such acts that worked within the system and, however provisionally, 
acknowledged its inevitability. It is also impossible to read this book without agreeing with 
von Frank that freedom in the larger sense—a "free point of view"—depended on 
envisioning and trying to enact a way of living and being not to b&foundbut to be created. 
North Carolina State University Dawn Keetley 
READING FOR REALISM: The History of a U.S. Literary Institution. 1850-1910. By 
Nancy Glazener. New Americanists. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press. 
1997. 
Few scholars produce truly interdisciplinary work as successfully as Nancy Glazener 
has in this remarkable study. Integrating historical detective work on the American 
publishing scene of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries with careful interpre­
tations of literary works and movements, she constructs an illuminating, complex picture 
that cannot be achieved without such an American studies approach. 
Glazener traces the construction of literary realism in terms of nineteenth-century 
publishing institutions. She argues that the very concept of realism, and the intellectual 
establishment's high valuation of its supposed moral effects, emerged from influential 
periodicals like The Atlantic Monthly and the men of letters, such as William Dean Ho wells 
and James Russell Lowell, who shaped them. In turn, public understanding of realism 
influenced not only which works individuals read but also how they read them. In fact, 
Glazener argues, public discourse about genre influenced the structure of specific, 
contemporary works of fiction. Glazener's approach thus weds elements of histoire du 
livre studies, which tend to focus principally on the world of publishing, and of reception 
studies, which tend to focus on readers. Ultimately, her book convincingly urges a 
reconsideration of the dialectic relationship between artistic production and consumption. 
and demonstrates that genre itself is a social construction, influenced by and "read" within 
the complex of contemporary assumptions, mores, and values. 
As a form touted by establishment periodicals, realism reproduced class-based social 
relations, despite the genre's claim to render "truthfully" to privileged readers the lives of 
the less privileged. The brand of realism promoted by Atlantic-group periodicals, which 
emphasized "some combination of philanthropic national citizenship and connoisseurship"
(43) based on the values of the upper class that produced those publications, 
promulgated a sense of noblesse oblige. It implicitly asked its readers to help the less 
fortunate while never questioning their sense of entitlement. 
The rise of mass-circulation magazines such as McClure's, the artistic "little 
magazines," and especially universities, as well as the growing internal difficulties among 
the Atlantic-group periodicals themselves, spelled the end of the Atlantic group's heyday 
as the premier arbiters of generic correctness. By providing a sense of continuity from the 
Atlantic group's canon-granting and genre-defining powers to those of today's academic 
critics, Glazener demonstrates that genres such as realism always—now as then—are 
138 
 constructed out of shifting, contemporary ideologies and reading practices based largely 
on race, class, and gender. 
With a helpful summary of the principal constituenus of the Atlantic group in an 
appendix and nearly a hundred pages of rigorously compiled notes and references, 
Reading for Realism amounts to a prodigious contribution to American literary history. 
Glazener's clear prose and sound organization of material augment her subtle, forceful 
argumentation. Bridging idealist and material orientations, the author masterfully scruti­
nizes the literary, social, political, and economic forces at play in the era of the Atlantic 
group, illuminating not only that period but also our own. Scholars of American studies 
who seek a model for groundbreaking, interdisciplinary research can do no better than read 
Reading for Realism. 
University of Washington, Bothell David Goldstein-Shirley 
WHITMAN, SLAVERY, AND THE EMERGENCE OF LEA VES OF GRASS. By Martin 
Klammer. University Park, Pennsylvania: The Pennsylvania State University Press. 1995. 
Walt Whitman's thinking about slavery and African Americans has been a compli­
cated and distressing issue in American literary criticism. Sometimes Whitman's expan­
sive poetry stands with slaves and includes African Americans within his democratic 
vision. Elsewhere he disregards African Americans and questions of racial justice 
or, worse, explains his ideas about the biological inferiority of black peoples. Some 
Whitman scholars have simply acknowledged Whitman's "vacillations and inconsisten­
cies" (Newton Arvin qtd. 2) on the subject of slavery, while other critics have ignored the 
issue altogether. 
In the late-1980s and 1990s, a number of more complex, historical examinations of 
Whitman's attitudes toward slavery, race, and African Americans appeared, thanks to 
critics such as Michael Moon, Betsy Erkkila, George Hutchinson, David Reynolds, and 
Christopher Beach among others. Klammer's book is one the very best studies from this 
recent wave of sophisticated, historicist work on Whitman and African Americans. 
Klammer argues that Whitman's evolving ideas about slavery are crucial to the 
development of the revolutionary poetry of the 1855 Leaves of Grass. Klammer does not 
consider race an incidental theme in Whitman's work. Instead, he insists that Whitman's 
thinking about slavery and African Americans is central to Leaves of Grass—its content, 
form, and purpose. The claim is bold and original, but grounded in competent, insightful 
historical research and shrewd attention to Whitman's poetry. 
Opening with a chapter on Whitman's temperance novel, Franklin Evans (1842), 
Klammer reveals how Whitman's early thinking about slavery is a defense of the 
proslavery South and a subversion of abolitionist literature. Following the Mexican War 
and the rise of the Free Soil movement, Whitman's attitudes begin to change, and he adopts 
an antislavery position grounded in concern for white workers. 
During the period between Whitman's Free Soil activism (which peaks in 1847) and 
a pair of pivotal events in 1854 (the Kansas-Nebraska Act and the Anthony Burns case), 
Whitman starts to experiment with new, more sympathetic ways of thinking about 
enslaved peoples and their sufferings. This more humanitarian view of African Americans 
coincides with his development of an innovative poetics, a rhetoric adequate to this 
emerging egalitarianism and sympathy with black peoples. Indeed Klammer "almost" 
asserts that Whitman's new antislavery thinking is an essential antecedent to Whitman's 
139 
 free verse poetics: "It is almost as if the radically sympathetic depiction of blacks compels 
Whitman toward an equally radical and new poetic form" (100). 
In the final two chapters, Klammer reveals what Whitman's development as a writer 
has produced: a book that "portrays African Americans as equal partners with whites in 
a democratic future and as . . . the paradigms of a fully realized humanity" (115). Although 
critics from D. H. Lawrence to the present have been suspicious of Whitman's sympathetic 
identification with slaves, Klammer wonders if such imaginative entry into the slave's 
experience is not in fact "the most compassionate response possible" (134), and he 
demonstrates marked similarities between Leaves of Grass and slave narratives. Klammer 
then illustrates how other poems in the 1855 Leaves of Grass, "I Sing the Body Electric" 
and "The Sleepers," move beyond antislavery humanitarianism to emphasize the histori­
cal, even cosmic significance of African Americans to American notions of identity and 
nation. In a denouement reversal of the intellectual development charted by this book, the 
Epilogue describes Whitman's "almost immediate retreat from these new and radical 
claims" (159) in the years following the initial publication of Leaves of Grass. 
Klammer's book is indispensable reading for anyone interested in Whitman's 
thinking about slavery and African Americans or his growth as a writer. 
Kansas State University Gregory Eiselein 
THE STRANGE SAD WAR REVOLVING: Walt Whitman, Reconstruction, and the 
Emergence of Black Citizenship, 1865-1876. By Luke Mancuso. Columbia, South 
Carolina: Camden House. 1997. 
Walt Whitman repeatedly spoke of the need to historicize his poetry. To do justice to 
Mancuso's fine book, one needs to hear once more a Whitman refrain, here articulated by 
him in "An Old Man's Rejoinder": "No great poem or other literary or artistic work of any 
scope... can be essentially consider'd without weighing first the age, politics (or want of 
politics) and aim, visible forms, unseen soul, and current times, out of the midst of which 
it rises and is formulated." Luke Mancuso has done just such weighing in The Strange Sad 
War Revolving. Mancuso painstakingly sets Whitman's Reconstruction texts into a 
historical frame of reference, bringing significant readings to poems that easily could slip 
by the reader. One such enriched reading is found, for example, in Mancuso's discussion 
of Whitman's 1867 "Tears." 
Mancuso disciplines his focus through the use of phrases which become, in essence, 
leitmotifs, the most significant of which is the phrase "cultural work." Just as Lincoln 
performed cultural work, Mancuso says, in his gradualist approach to abolition, so too did 
Whitman perform cultural work in his poetry as he indirectly represented the presence of 
unity in the midst of variety. The phrase "cultural work" emphasizes Whitman's aesthetics 
and also emphasizes the interplay between the actualities of the post-bellum world and 
Whitman's poetry. Another recurring phrase is "national household," used effectively 
when speaking about union in the United States. The "national household" becomes for 
Mancuso the "renovated national household" after the war. Whitman's "cultural work" in 
terms of renovation was to enhance more deliberately images representing inclusion. A 
succinct example of Mancuso's own fusion of the realities of the period with Whitman's 
poetry occurs when Mancuso refers to the 1867 Leaves of Grass as "disheveled raggedness"
speaking from the "disheveled days after emancipation" (17-18). 
Mancuso departs from what has become a familiar reading of the "Calamus" cluster 
in terms of its homosexual significance in that he, Mancuso, takes seriously Whitman's 
140 
 statement in the 1876 Preface to Leaves of Grass: "the special meaning of the 'Calamus' 
cluster of 'Leaves of Grass,' . . . mainly resides in its political significance." In the 
following passage, Mancuso articulates his sense of "comradeship" as he sees Whitman 
using the term: 
As images of a national household, forced to renovate the foundation 
it had built on slavery, the separations and deaths of blood relatives 
were deployed as representations of such a breakage with the Revo­
lutionary past so that a more racially diverse republic might be 
constructed out the 'whirl & deafening din' in the aftermath of the 
war. Only then, as the poet of a reconstructed national home, would 
Whitman make the riskier rhetorical move of reaching out to strangers 
[comrades], beyond kinsfolk, in a gesture that became the cultural 
cornerstone of his constructing a consolidated nation out of diverse 
ethnic racial differences. (6) 
Skillfully, Mancuso weaves into his reading of the "Calamus" cluster the thread of what 
Whitman termed "religious" or "spiritual" democracy. The gestures of friendship 
or comradeship outside family ties became crucial for Whitman in the war years, a 
"reaching out to strangers," as Mancuso says, mancuso expertly assists his readers to 
contextualize Whitman's poetry in the inclusivity that Whitman felt was mandatory for a 
truly "United" States. 
Inclusive though Mancuso's reading of Whitman is, Mancuso has, however, short­
changed one important historical aspect: the denial to women of the vote. Mancuso does 
belatedly mention the political denial of women's suffrage after the war when the 13th, 
14th, and 15th Amendments were being passed, but he narrows his focus to males. For 
example, he says, "Nonetheless, abolitionists continued to lobby an increasingly reluctant 
Republican Congress for the franchise for blacks" (51). His not using the phrase "black 
males" constitutes a strange lapse for a writer who so obviously knows his history. 
However, readers and students and teachers of Whitman will find in Luke Mancuso's 
book his strong sense of history wedded to his astute readings of Whitman's words. 
Mancuso's courageous readings and the control with which he fuses history and poetry 
open up yet another Walt Whitman to readers. Mancuso takes hold of Whitman's 
"indirections" and convincingly, richly, and inspiringly gives us back a strong sense of the 
Reconstruction Whitman. 
Texas Tech University Sherry Ceniza 
CULTURE AND COMFORT: Parlor Making and Middle-Class Identity, 1850-1930. By 
Katherine C. Grier. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press: 1998. 
Victorian sensibility, long made synonymous with repression, stuffiness and prudery 
has been revised by contemporary historians who now identify Victorianism as a vibrant, 
complex and contradictory Anglo-American culture. We now understand that many 
Victorians had satisfying sexual lives, their arts displayed a vibrant confidence and the 
twined ideologies of domesticity and progress and the tension between them characterized 
much of the nineteenth century. 
Victorian material culture has been less subject to revisionist interpretation. In part 
because the domestic interiors of Victorian homes are stuffy. It is close to impossible to 
141 
 look at the overstuffed chairs, heavy drapes and omnipresent animacasters of Victorians 
parlors and feel anything but claustrophobic. The Victorian parlor has now found 
its amanuenses in Katherine C. Grier's Culture and Comfort: Parlor Making and Middle 
Class Identity, 1850-1930, a detailed and brilliant analysis of the meaning of this 
quintessentially Victorian room and how its objects became infused with cultural mean­
ing. According to Grier, the tension between culture (linked to cosmopolitanism) 
and comfort (tied to domesticity) found in Victorian life generally is the essence of the 
parlor. If indeed one of the most important aspects of the nineteenth century is the 
unquestioned establishment of a hegemonic ideology rooted in the middle class, than the 
great strength of Grier's book is its proof of the material representation of that ideology 
within domestic space. 
Key to this notion of the parlor as theater is the belief that a sensitive person can 
discern meaning infused in objects. There though lies a problem (first identified by 
historian Karen Haltunnen). If the careful student of the parlors displayed by department 
stores international expositions, magazines, and photographic studios could "learn" the 
rhetoric of furnishing and manners how did one guarantee that the performance of middle 
class sensibility was sincere? And as lower priced lines of furniture and consumer credit 
schemes put the parlor (or at least aspects of parlor gentility) within the grasp of the 
working man's family how did the parlor remain emblematic of the middle class? 
These problems may have contributed to the disappearance of the parlor from the 
housing plans of American builders by the 1920s. As importantly though, American 
income was going toward smaller houses and the new found necessity of buying and 
maintaining a family car. More relaxed rules of etiquette eliminated the need for a formal 
stage like the parlor and a concern for better domestic hygiene banished the dust catching 
bibelots of the Victorian parlor to the, well, dust bin. 
Culture and Comfort is not a new book. In its present form it's a pared down edition 
of Grier's far lengthier companion volume to a Strong Museum exhibit. The book suffers 
in several unfortunate ways from this genesis. First, the three chapters devoted to spring 
form upholstery are meant to be a case study of Grier's themes of aesthetics, technology 
and taste but they slow down the narrative with oftentimes tedious detail. Secondly, Grier 
fails to account for the theoretical insights of Pierre Bordieu on class and taste and for the 
proliferation of theoretical insights on the body, all developments of the ten years since the 
original publication of the book. 
Finally, like many cultural historians, Grier conflates British and American 
Victorianism. An "anxiety" about class status characterized middle class Victorians as 
Greier and others claim, an anxiety that led to the careful study of objects, consumer 
ideology, etiquette and behavior—one was middle class because one looked and acted 
middle class. Yet it would seem that that anxiety is more easily seen in the United States 
where there was mobility and strong beliefs about mobility than in England with its 
deferential society and a bourgeois and "respectable" working class secure in their status. 
In other words, a more sharply defined contrast between the British and American case 
would be helpful. 
Grier's book is a significant accomplishment and one that will stand as a classic study 
of a time when Americans Victorians negotiated between the discourses of "domesticity's 
ethos of anti-consumption and gentility's ethos of pleasurable consumption." 
University of Kansas Ann Schofield 
142 
 WHY THE AMERICAN CENTURY? By Olivier Zunz. Chicago and London: University 
of Chicago Press. 1998. 
THE AMERICAN CENTURY: The Rise and Decline of the United States as a World 
Power. By Donald W. White. New Haven: Yale University Press: 1998. 
THE AMERICAN CENTURY. By Harold Evans. New York: Alfred Knopf. 1998. 
Even though it has to share the spotlight with the portentous and intriguing end of a 
millennium, the twentieth century seems destined to receive ample attention. Its waning 
years are bringing forth a variety of retrospective studies trying to tell us what it has been 
all about. While it is perhaps a little early for truly profound and lasting perspectives, one 
runaway early favorite has been a notion propounded more than 50 years ago by American 
publisher Henry Luce. Luce argued in a famous 1941 editorial in Life magazine that 
if Americans had the courage to assume the mantle of world leadership this century could 
and should become "The American Century." The three books reviewed here (there are 
a handful of other books with similar titles, including Studs Terkel's My American 
Century) suggest that Luce was prescient—his "American Century" theme has struck a 
responsive chord. 
Despite the similar titles Olivier Zunz, Donald White, and Harold Evans have written 
very different kinds of books. Zunz ignores the overt manifestations of American power 
to focus on the ideological foundations of American ascendancy. In the first half of the 
twentieth century an elite of government, business, and intellectual leaders developed a 
"liberal consensus" ideology that steered the U.S. on a middle road between "laissezfaire"
capitalism and socialism and emphasized America's world leadership role. Zunz' 
early chapters examine a "matrix of inquiry," a unique combination of universities, 
philanthropic foundations, industrial research laboratories, and the military, that began to 
turn the "production of knowledge" into economic, political, and military power. Subse­
quent sections consider how abundance, consumerism, and political pluralism helped to 
deflect, diffuse, and "de-radicalize" traditional class differences in American society. 
Zunz is particularly attentive to the role of social science theorists in promoting these 
processes. One especially original chapter recounts the U.S.' attempt to remake Japan in 
the American image in the aftermath of World War H. Finally, events of the 1960s and the 
rise of identity politics revealed the limitations of white middle class consensus and 
undermined much of its ideology. 
Zunz is an innovative and perceptive social critic. He crosses disciplinary boundaries 
with ease and felicity, and is particularly adept at illustrating large themes with unusual but 
telling details. On the negative side, Why the American Century? is essentially a collection 
of loosely related studies of twentieth century American culture. While its chapters work 
well as individual essays, their relationship to each other and their connections to the 
"American Century" theme are not always clearly evident. 
Like Zunz, Donald White is interested in the origins of America's superpower status. 
But in contrast to Zunz' meticulously detailed, ideologically focused perspective, White 
gives us a Toynbee-esque birds'-eye geo-political view. His American Century is an 
ambitious attempt to describe and explain the "growth, flourishing, and decline" of the 
"world role" of the U.S. in the twentieth century (1). White describes and evaluates various 
theories of America's rise to world power—explanations that run from environmental 
determinism to innate racial or cultural characteristics to the unique advantages of our 
143 
 political and economic system. He details the manifestations of American superpower 
status—American cultural and economic penetration of the world, foreign aid programs, 
foreign policy decisions—and offers comparative surveys of world geo-political power. 
The final sections of The American Century examine the decline of America's world role 
at the end of the twentieth century. 
Like Zunz, White is interested in both elite and popular culture versions of "consen­
sus" ideology, is aware of and critical of the limitations of "American Century" thinking, 
and attends to the emergence of New Left and counter culture challenges to the liberal 
consensus that supported American hegemony. He contrasts the humane, cosmopolitan 
internationalism of Henry Wallace's vision of the twentieth century as the "century of the 
common man" to the imperial nationalism of Luce's "American Century." 
Any book that tries to do so much runs the risk of appearing naive and superficial on 
many specific topics. White looks for manifestations of American Century ideology, for 
example, in literature, photographic journalism, music, television, Hollywood, and the 
globalization of the English language. But these topics receive an average coverage of 
about two pages each, which does not allow for much depth or subtlety. Equally 
problematic is the "decline and fall" theme central to the book, which reads like it was 
written in the late 1970s. There is no discussion of the collapse of communism and the 
Soviet Union or of the American economic and military resurgence of past two decades. 
Harold Evans is a successor to Henry Luce as one of the century ' s foremost publishers 
and editors. The time frame of his American Century is slightly eccentric: the second 
century of American society under the Constitution—from 1889 to 1989. Evans' 700-plus 
over-sized pages are divided into 15 chapters, some with a chronological and others with 
a topical focus. Each has a similar format—a substantial introductory essay, followed by 
numerous short subsections and vignettes. The narrative is supported by an excellent 
collection of photographs, more than 900 in all. 
Evans ' American Century is a book for browsing rather than reading straight through. 
It has a personal and idiosyncratic flavor, with individual sections and pages overshadow­
ing unifying themes. The focus is predominantly political, the tone by and large an 
admiring outsider's celebration of America's commitment to freedom and democracy, and 
the ideological position consistently liberal. But the book's strength is its individual parts, 
and the photographs. Though based mostly on secondary-sources the narrative is surpris­
ingly well done, and even academic specialists are likely to find many sections impressive 
and informative. 
None of these books are traditional American Studies fare. Zunz' social and cultural 
history perspective will likely be most familiar to AS readers. Despite the fact that White 
uses periodical, popular culture, and intellectual history sources typical of American 
Studies works, his general perspective is international relations and diplomatic history. 
Still, he deals with issues that ought to be of interest to almost any well educated American. 
At its best his approach is reminiscent of Paul Kennedy's magisterial Rise and Fall of the 
Great Powers. Evan's American Century is the least academic of the three, and is in fact 
intended primarily for a popular audience. But surprisingly (to me), I admired and enjoyed 
his book at least as much as the other two. It makes great casual or bedside reading, but it 
also has a serious edge. And there is enough of it to keep the most avid reader occupied for 
a long time. 
None of these books will be the definitive last word in understanding the twentieth 
century. None makes this century comprehensible in fundamental terms comparable to the 
Enlightenment and French Revolution of the 18th century or the industrial revolution and 
144 
 imperialism of the 19th. Still, all three make significant contributions, on very different 
levels, toward explaining the United States and the twentieth century. That's no small 
accomplishment. 
Wayne State College Kent Blaser 
THE DIALECT OF MODERNISM: Race, Language, and Twentieth-Century Literature. 
by Michael North. New York: Oxford University Press. 1994. 
This book is an engaging, extremely well documented account of how post-WWI 
modernism begins with a desire for collaboration between black and white writers which 
soon splits into two distinctly different varieties of modernism. North carefully examines 
how figures such as T. S. Elliot, Ezra Pound, and William Carlos Williams saw African 
American culture and language as a kind of "transfusion" which could vitalize an 
American literary culture which had been made anemic by the standardized language and 
conventional values of English and European society. Black intellectuals and artists such 
as Alain Locke, Claude McKay, and Jean Toomer initially welcomed this interest in black 
language and culture, sensing it would finally bring both out of the obscurity in which they 
had previously languished. As Locke observed in The New Negro, such a "common effort" 
promised to "discover and release the national spirit" in literature, resulting in a renais­
sance for American culture. 
North examines in a lucid, convincing way why this "alliance of black and white 
writers against the academy" (146) soon broke down, producing on the one hand a 
modernism practiced by white writers which was promised upon a desire to use black 
vernacular to create fresh literary forms and, on the other hand, a black modernism 
centered in a deep suspicion of dialect writing and a desire to find alternatives to it. North 
explains this split in a number of ways. First of all, many white experimental writers of the 
period like Pound were ambivalent about black culture or like Eliot, essentially hostile to 
it. Secondly, white writers such as Carl Van Vechten, despite their good intentions, 
appropriated black folk materials while having only a superficial understanding of them 
and, as a result, trivialized them, thus reducing them to timeworn stereotypes which were 
anathema for twentieth-century blacks. Finally, North argues that the racial climate of the 
post-World War I period was especially restrictive, producing a "fundamental asymme­
try" (150) between the races which made serious contact between blacks and whites all 
but impossible. 
Concretizing these ideas, North focuses sharply on three important African American 
writers of the period, Claude McKay, Jean Toomer, and Zora Neale Hurston, carefully 
describing how each got caught between the conflicting demands of these two modernisms 
and how this resulted in creating substantial personal and literary problems for each. North 
sees McKay as caught in a "trap from which he was never quite to emerge" (102) because 
his dialect poetry led him to a soft and debilitating romanticism rooted in the stereotypes 
of the plantation and minstrel traditions while his novels written in standard English 
reduced him to a condition of anomie which ultimately silenced him as a writer. North 
presents Toomer in a similar way, arguing that his much-discussed denial of blackness and 
his lapsing into literary silence after the publication of Cane were triggered by the fact that 
he could not be nourished by either modernism. When he wrote fiction and poetry rooted 
in black folk speech, he became uncomfortable with the label of a "negro writer" who, in 
Waldo Frank's words, would "do.. . his Negro stuff' ( 164). Yet when he wrote non-dialect 
145 
 prose he felt himself personally erased as a modernist writer dispossessed of a cultural 
roots and a distinctive voice. 
North finally argues that Hurston, like McKay and Toomer, was led astray by a 
number of white patrons who pushed her in two equally unproductive directions. Charlotte 
Osgood Mason directed her to write stereotypically in the tradition of black dialect 
literature while British aristocrat Nancy Cunard brought her to leftist politics which had 
little to do with her most deeply felt experiences as an African American woman. Caught 
in this trap, Hurston, like McKay and Toomer, was never able to develop her full literary 
potential and died in obscurity. 
The considerably strengths and unfortunate weaknesses of North's book are not hard 
to discern. He brilliantly describes the classic problems which white intellectuals and a 
crudely racist society posed for black writers in the twenties and thirties and he does a very 
good job of assessing the literary damage caused by these influences. But he has all too 
little say about how literary masterpieces such as Cane and Their Eyes Were Watching God 
as well as important novels like Banana Bottom and Home to Harlem, for the most part, 
transcended their cultural context and became landmarks in African American literary 
tradition. Very late in the book North mentions that the "genius" ( 194) of Hurston, McKay, 
and Toomer enabled them to "work past" the dilemmas created by the white avant-garde 
but, curiously, he fails to develop this critically important point. 
The reader is therefore left strangely unsatisfied by this massively researched, 
sometimes brilliant, but finally incomplete study. Perhaps the real problem can be traced 
to the book's single-minded methodology. Using New Historicist tools in an altogether 
skillful way, North can focus sharply on the literary dilemmas faced by black writers in the 
racially turbulent and repressive decades following World War I in America. But he needs 
to employ subtler, more penetrating methodologies to go beyond this and examine how 
three important African American writers could, to varying degrees, effectively cope with 
these problems and produce fiction of lasting importance. 
This broadened critical perspective also would have led North to a more nuanced 
understanding of how black and white writers interacted with each other during this period. 
Given the 20/20 hindsight of late twentieth-century America, one can certainly find much 
to lament about what North calls the "overt racism of writers like Conrad, Stein, Eliot and 
Williams" (195) and one could surely agree that some of their influence on black writing 
was clearly harmful. But it is also true that such writers were not unremittingly negative 
influences and that in many important ways they exerted an extremely beneficial influence 
on black writing. Richard Wright learned much about the craft of fiction from Conrad and 
Stein, as well as culturally conservative writers like James and Dostoevski whose political 
ideas he clearly rejected. And Ralph Ellison was correct in noting throughout his career that 
Eliot was one of his most important literary "ancestors," a writer who helped to empower 
him not only by inspiring him to turn from music to literature but also showed him how 
to use a variety of folk materials, including jazz and black vernacular language, to become 
a writer who could explore the full range of African American experience in modernistic 
ways which indeed fulfilled Alain Locke's hopes for meaningful cross-fertilization of 
black and white American art. 
Canisius College Robert Butler 
146 
 RE-IMAGINING THE MODERN AMERICAN WEST: A Century of Fiction, History, 
and Art. By Richard W. Etulain. Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 1996. 
We have witnessed a decade-long debate about how western history should be 
written, and we inherit a shelfful of titles by authors proposing to "re-invent," "remythologize,"
and "re-vision" the American West, each of them understanding the West 
in different ways. In Re-Imagining the Modern American West, Richard Etulain surveys 
the currents of the "old" and the "new" in history, fiction, and art. It is a daunting 
undertaking. Although he says he has written a nontheoretical study, Etulain furnishes 
some useful ideas for handling the intellectual currents of the ongoing dialogue. 
The first section on the Pioneer West covers the most recognizable writers and 
artists—Owen Wister, Frederick Remington, James Fenimore Cooper, Francis Parkman, 
George Catlin, Karl Bodmer, Alfred Jacob Miller. But the point at which frontier or pioneer 
west gives way to writers of the "regional west" is more difficult to define. Etulain uses 
H. G. Meriam's idea of "inworked substance" to define the transition to regional writing, 
and he means the point where writers describe the "interplay over time between people and 
the environment" (83). Thus, Mary Hallock Foote is a frontier writer, but Mary Austin and 
Willa Cather are regionalists. Some readers may find that line too finely drawn. 
Etulain's ideas are most interesting in the last section, where he writes about "postregional"
fiction, history, and art. If regionalists are writers who give overriding impor­
tance to landscape and to the imprint of landscape on human life, then post-regionalists are 
writers for whom other issues—gender and race and ethnicity—are imposed upon 
landscape and sometimes take precedence. The question to be addressed is whether a 
"post-regional" novel is still "western." In the post-regional western novel, such distinc­
tions are less secure than they seemed fifty years ago. According to Etulain, "post-regional 
literature has dramatically broken away from major trends in western fiction before 1950" 
(159). Complexity and change join the west to America's other regional literatures, and to 
national traditions. This is not an escape from judgment; on the contrary, it is a wise reading 
of western culture and expression. 
The scope of Etulain's book is so large that there are bound to be readers who will take 
exception to some parts of it. I applaud the author's narrative that includes painting and 
photography along with history and fiction, even as I find it difficult to understand why 
there are only a spare three paragraphs devoted to Mary Austin. That reservation aside, 
Etulain's work is a good and useful guide through a huge display of western writing. Most 
readers will find him an astute scholar and a fair man. 
Brooklyn College-CUNY Lillian Schlissel 
CULTURE OF INTOLERANCE: Chauvinism, Class and Racism in the United States. By 
Mark Nathan Cohen. New Haven: Yale University Press. 1998. 
It seemed like a good thing to do. I was grounded in Los Angeles due to this past 
summer's pilot strike against Northwest Airlines and, despite having lived in Southern 
California for the better part of a decade, I had never been there. And, indeed, what I saw 
at the Simon Wiesenthal Museum of Tolerance helped me get a handle on why I was so 
disappointed with anthropologist Mark Nathan Cohen's Culture of Intolerance. 
Now don't get me wrong, about either the Museum or Cohen's book. The Museum, 
which tells the tragic story of the Holocaust and documents the costs and consequences of 
147 
 racism and anti-Semitism, makes for a provocative, if deliberately partisan and unsettling, 
educational experience. Cohen's book, to its credit, shares many of these qualities and 
concerns. Born out of Cohen's disgust with Hernnstein and Murray's infamous attempt to 
demonstrate that genetic differences account for inequality and immobility in the U.S., 
Culture of Intolerance argues that human difference and, by extension, social inequality 
are not rooted in biology but rather constructed in "culture" conceived in the broadest, 
anthropological sense. Cohen's larger goal is to suggest that The Bell Curve represents just 
one very vulgar and extremist expression of deeply rooted American problems with 
inequality and cultural diversity. The bulk of Cohen's book, then, is devoted to exposing 
and (to use a word he wouldn't) deconstructing the belief systems that Cohen believes 
perpetuate and in fact legitimate many social problems in the U.S. Like the Museum, 
Cohen is passionate about these important issues, and has produced a volume that invites 
a general audience to think about them in an intelligent, critical manner. But as much as 
we need scholarly work that is politically engaged and publicly accessible, I am not 
convinced that Cohen's conception of social science as a core of timeless knowledge 
captures the complexities of the phenomena he addresses or offers an adequate rebuttal to 
the conservative approaches he rightly rejects. 
At a very basic level, Cohen systematically conflates forms of inequality based upon 
class and the economy with those that originate in race and racism. (Not to mention that 
such a fundamental source of inequality as gender is almost nonexistent or that empirical 
support is absent altogether). More fundamentally, Cohen never really articulates why or 
for whom these various forms of inequality are harmful. The problem here is not just that 
there are different causes and costs associated with different forms of inequality. The 
deeper problem is that Cohen's adamant cultural relativism would seem to leave little room 
for the strident condemnations of inequality, racism, and other forms of " chauvinism" that 
punctuate the entire analysis. It is not that relativists cannot make normative claims; 
indeed, much of contemporary critical theory—such as Michael Walzer's aptly titled On 
Toleration (1997)—is directed towards such ends. But Cohen is oblivious to this work and 
its inherent complications, and does little to work through them himself. 
Even if we grant the general dilemma posed by inequality, it is by no means clear that 
intolerance is the sole source of the problem—or, conversely, that increased tolerance 
holds the key to social transformation. More than a few social scientists would certainly 
insist that indifference and inattention must also be taken into account. Yet Cohen's 
undifferentiated conception of culture makes it difficult to even articulate the various 
social structures and institutions here in effect. 
Cohen is also intent on defending cultural difference and diversity. This impulse is 
important and appropriate, and these passages contain some of Cohen's most thoughtprovoking
discussions and examples. But they are not necessarily consistent with his 
overarching critique of inequality and intolerance. For one thing, this move requires a shift 
away from the passive language of tolerance to the active language of recognition a la 
Charles Taylor's well-known lecture on the politics of recognition. Secondly, there is the 
unfortunate fact that diversity has been inextricably linked with inequality throughout 
American history. The real challenge is to figure out how—or if—meaningful social 
differences can be defended and preserved without perpetuating social inequalities. 
Culture of Intolerance offers a number of good and important points but, taken as a 
whole, fails to ground them empirically or situate them in a satisfactory theoretical frame. 
This does not make it a bad book; but neither does it make a good piece of social science. 
For a work that purports to synthesize "basic," "common" and "uncontroversial" scholarly 
148 
 knowledge, this result is particularly unfortunate for its net effect could be to perpetuate 
the false belief—held by those who need it most—that social science is little more than 
watered-down political rhetoric or second-rate social philanthropy. If the philosophers, 
politicians, and popularizers do it better, what is left for social scientists—however 
well-intended and ultimately correct they may be? 
University of Minnesota Douglas Hartmann 
CITY CODES: Reading the Modern Urban Novel. By Hana Wirth-Nesher. New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 1996. 
THE NATURALISTIC INNER-CITY NOVEL IN AMERICA: Encounters With the Fat 
Man. By James R. Giles. Columbia, South Carolina: University of South Carolina 
Press.1995. 
Cities are spaces where the public and private intersect, often complexly. They are 
also the place where one encounters the Other. These complementary ideas are the 
respective groundings for two fine studies of big city novels that build on the foundations 
of naturalism and modernism to appreciate the sometimes disruptive force of the postmodern. 
Hana Wirth-Nesher is interested in the different discourses that result when setting 
(as opposed to the more usual character, plot, and theme) becomes a novel's principal 
motivator. Viewpoints an such settings are obvious signals of contrast. At the beginning 
Wirth-Nesher establishes her case by analogy, letting readers see the difference between 
two urban portraits (Hopper's Room in Brooklyn and Manet's The Balcony) and between 
two narrative perspectives (Fitzgerald's contrast in The Crack Up of New York seen from 
the Plaza rooftop in the 1920s to the view from the Empire State Building in the 1930s). 
City Codes: Reading the Modern Urban Novel then offers detailed explications of nine 
major texts (from 1900 to 1972) that emphasize the urban environment differently, 
centering on the natural, the built, the human, and the verbal. Wirth-Nesher's roster is 
impressive and each author's contribution is distinctive. Singer and Oz show people 
disrupted by the urban; Dreiser offers characters constructed by it. Ellison laments the 
invisibility of self, while James projects it eagerly into new terrain, anticipating Henry 
Roth's tactic in Call it Sleep. Readerly expectations are reversed by Joyce and Woolf, but 
while Dubliners and the Portrait find closure in paralysis Mrs. Dalloway discovers great 
enablement in the fact that life can be homier outside the home. Throughout, attention to 
setting yields exceptionally fresh readings, a reminder that critical dispositions as well as 
writing styles are matters for development. 
That American literary naturalism is still developing even through postmodern times 
is evident in James R. Giles's exceptionally insightful study. The "fat man" of his subtitle 
is the minor character encountered famously in the 1893 version of Crane's Maggie: A Girl 
of the Streets, where urban deprivation is fascinating but so repellent that the implied 
narrator holds the spectacle at arm's length. After presenting one of the best reviews on 
record of both naturalism's achievements and criticism s response, Giles proceeds with 
readings of six novels not customarily studied in the same view: Jews without Money, 
Native Son, The Man with the Golden Arm, Last Exit to Brooklyn, City of Night, and them. 
As he makes his way through them, Giles compares and contrasts these works in a way that 
shows a growing appreciation of otherness among important American novelists. Michael 
Gold's characters, for example, are victims of external forces, and hence are easily saved; 
149 
 Richard Wright's Bigger Thomas, however, is locked within a masturbatory prison that is 
far less easily escaped. With Nelson Algren and Hubert Selby the reader meets characters 
completely beyond redemption. For people such as these there is no social reformation, but 
especially for Selby that is not the point; what matters is that the writer now takes the reader 
inside the experience with no "reassuring distance." A reading of John Rechy's work 
reveals the humanness of what is otherwise a repressed (and hence unarticulated) 
subculture, while Joyce Carol Oates actively pursues strategies for giving voice to the 
voiceless. 
Wirth-Nesher's novels are strongly canonical. Giles's are not, But both scholars take 
a new approach to urban fiction that extends readers' limits of understanding. Character, 
plot, and theme are interests that lend themselves too easily to intentional misreadings— 
readings that flatter the critic's presuppositions and reinforce what readers think they 
already know. Setting resists this, and Wirth-Nesher' attention to it allows classics such 
as The Ambassadors and Invisible Man to be understood in new ways. Giles's expansion 
of the canon is more radical, but is just as necessary for the urban novel's comprehension. 
Together, City Codes and The Naturalistic Inner-City Novel in America are essential 
reading for those who wish to know how such fiction contributes to cultural awareness. 
University of Northern Iowa Jerome Klinkowitz 
THE AMERICAN COUNTRY CLUB : Its Origins and Development. By James M. Mayo. 
New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press. 1998. 
In The American Country Club James M. Mayo provides a very useful overview of 
the history of the American country club from a point of view that is somewhere between 
that of a historian of architecture and that of an enlightened club manager. Synthesizing 
material from the histories of many individual clubs and from trade journals with selected 
materials from social and architectural history, Mayo covers a great deal of ground. He 
traces the origins of the American country club to the all-male clubs that Americans built 
on English models after the mid-nineteenth century, to late nineteenth-and early 
twentieth-century athletic clubs, to family-based nineteenth-century summer resorts, to 
the late nineteenth-century enthusiasm for tennis and then for golf; and to suburbanization. 
In the twentieth century, he argues, country clubs have been shaped by such forces as the 
intensification of suburbanization, the rise of the automobile, the increase in wealth and 
leisure, the women's movement, and the civil rights movement, as filtered through the 
markets for suburban residential properties and for the revenues essential to club opera­
tion. The Great Depression cut club membership by as much as 78%, according to one 
contemporary source that Mayo cites, but country clubs survived depression and the 
rationing of wartime and have flourished since the 1950s. 
Mayo acknowledges and quotes key sources for all the objections that social critics 
have raised against city and country clubs: that they are mere sites for conspicuous 
consumption; that they have consistently discriminated against Jews and African-Americans; 
that they consign women to subordinate places; that they provide opportunities for the 
consolidation of power; that they serve as essential venues for the precise definition of 
social status in the U. S.; that they utilize outdated architectural styles; that they abuse the 
environment. He suggests that many clubs are now well along in accommodating women 
and in overcoming their traditions of discrimination on religious and racial grounds. He 
argues that the architectural and environmental criticisms have been overstated. He notes 
that for many members, the country club simply facilitates the combination of resources 
150 
 necessary to procure attractive amenities for those whose household budgets cannot 
sustain individual recreational facilities on the grand scale. And he urges that in debating 
criticisms relating to status and power we keep in mind the realities of the American 
political economy. 
It is a real achievement to put all this between the covers of a brief and readable book: 
criticisms are more appropriately phrased as suggestions for future research that will build 
on this useful survey. Historians of business and of nonprofit organizations will want to 
know more about the incorporation and tax status of country clubs. Federal tax laws treat 
many social clubs as mutual benefit organizations that do not "distribute" profits and thus 
are not subject to corporate income tax. Does this fact—or do possible changes in state and 
local tax treatment—account for some of the changes in corporate organization that Mayo 
notes, and for other changes as well? Mayo describes some regional variations in leisure 
and sporting activities and in architectural styles: are there other regional variations as 
well? He quotes accounts that place the clubs of Kansas City and other places into a single 
status hierarchy, but does not explore the possibility that country clubs fit into distinct or 
even competing hierarchies. He notes that city clubs often celebrate cultural achievement 
in part by maintaining libraries and art collections, but that country clubs have never 
included libraries: does this imply broader changes in American culture, or simply a 
proliferation of special-purpose organizations? Much more might be done with changing 
uses of leisure, with the history of architecture and landscape, and with questions about 
race, class, and gender. And surely it is not best practice to use "elite" as a noun meaning 
"wealthy person". Future scholars have much to do, and many reasons to thank Mayo for 
this introductory study. 
Case Western Reserve University David C. Hammack 
THE WHITE SCOURGE: Mexicans, Blacks and Poor Whites in Texas Cotton Culture. 
By Neil Foley. Berkeley: University of California Press. 1997. 
Neil Foley's monograph weaves together a wide array of sources into a fascinating 
narrative that illuminates the construction and application of a racial hierarchy in the rich 
cotton growing lands of Central Texas. As the work makes abundantly clear, race and class 
relations in this area are immensely complex and do not fit into the traditional combina­
tions of black-white, Anglo-Mexican and rich-poor interactions. In this locale we encoun­
ter a society in which "cultural elements of the South, the West, and Mexico have come 
together to form a unique borderlands culture" (2). 
Standing atop this racial pyramid, racially and economically, were white farm owners 
(and white tenants who aspired to ownership) followed by Mexicans and African 
Americans who comprised the laboring base (as tenants, sharecroppers and agricultural 
workers). Foley's tome examines the years between Reconstruction and the 1940s and 
reveals how these "races" interacted against an evolving economic backdrop. Many of 
Foley's findings are as expected; individuals of the "dark" groups were primarily confined 
to the lowest occupational levels and provided little opportunity to move up. As family 
farms became less commercially viable, however, there is a surprising twist to this story. 
By the early 1900s "'whiteness' itself fissured along race and class lines" (5). This trend 
led to the creation of a new group of people in Central Texas—the "poor trash" whites. 
In recent years scholars in the field of Mexican American history have examined how 
the "construction" of "whiteness" retarded opportunities for Spanish-surnamed men, 
151 
 women and children (most notable among these works is Camille Guerin-Gonzalez's 
Mexican Workers and American Dreams). While pathbreaking in many respects, these 
studies have a crucial limitation; it appears as if almost all whites were invariably linked 
by their racial and economic status. Foley ' s research reveals that this is not necessarily the 
case. As economic conditions changed (and the role of corporate farming increased) farm 
owners often moved their black and white tenants off their properties and replaced them 
with Mexican (whom they perceived as more docile and willing to endure harsh condi­
tions). This trend had a twofold impact on Central Texas society. First, movement into 
tenancy provided some Spanish-speakers with a chance to claim some level of "white­
ness." Second, poor displaced whites began a descent down the social ladder. These 
individuals often wound up working as hired hands alongside "dirty" Mexicans and 
blacks. In the work's most powerful chapters (Chapters 5 and 6), Foley examines how 
"elect" whites directed the labors of these agricultural proletarians through Taylorism and 
the impact of these changes on the lives of women in the various racial groups. 
The principal contribution of this work lies in the author's ability to capture and 
elucidate the complexity of race and class relations. The racial hierarchy may have been 
constructed to maintain white supremacy and unity, but economic realities altered this 
goal. Foley's work provides evidence to support the contention that racial construction is 
not static and that class interests, locale and economic circumstances are crucial variables 
in understanding how the ranking of individuals and groups in a social hierarchy change 
over time. 
Texas Tech University Jorge Iber 
VICTIMS AND HEROES: Racial Violence in the African American Novel. By Jerry H. 
Bryant. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. 1997. 
Covering eighty-three novels by sixty-four writers, Bryant's Victims and Heroes 
examines the presence of racial violence in over 150 years of African-American novels. 
Bryant chronologically canvasses a combination of familiar voices (Douglass, Toomer, 
Wright, Ellison, Morrison) and novelists who have received scant critical attention 
(George Washington Lee, Waters Turpin, Sarah E. Wright, Joseph Nazel). The capacious 
breadth of coverage casts the study less in the conventions of theme-based critical works 
than in the manner of synthetic surveys like Robert Bone's now-dated The Negro Novel 
in American (1965) or Bernard Bell's The Afro-American Novel and its Tradition (1987). 
The ubiquity of racial violence in African-American novels is so jarring as to make one 
realize that Bryant's book is long overdue—especially when historians, such as Ronald 
Takaki and Herbert Shapiro, have ably addressed the topic much earlier. 
Bryant is cogently alert to the double-edged nature of violence. It is not only the most 
visible marker of ongoing oppression, as the multiple literary instances of inter-racial 
whipping, lynching, torture and rioting attest, it is also a site of potential liberation and 
redemption, as framed, for example, in the "retaliatory or revolutionary" expressions of 
Black Power/Black Arts novelists. Where black writers unsurprisingly condemn white 
violence using an impressive range of artistic devices, they are more ambivalent about 
representing violent black counterresponses. Bryant's individual readings of novels are, 
in many cases, unified by his interest in coming to terms with this ambivalence. 
Victims and Heroes will probably be less appealing to cover-to-cover readers, since 
similar points are driven home in novel after novel, than to those interested in the manner 
152 
 in which violence is manifested in particular periods or texts, especially those not often 
studied. Bryant rewards such readers with clear prose, as well as a helpful table of contents, 
in-depth endnotes, a fine index, and a good instinct for allowing individual discussions 
to stand on their own. Bryant's depth of knowledge and level of detail reflect, as he 
acknowledges, a writer who has lived with the material for a very long time. The very 
few omissions—George Wylie Henderson's Jule and Curtis Lucus' The Flour is Dusty 
come to mind—are countered by an awareness of writers as obscure as Otis Shackelford 
and Carl Offord. 
I bring up one criticism. Where novels are discussed rather than mentioned in passing, 
I would have liked some distinctions drawn about their relative merits, which position 
them as more than formal artifacts from which details and themes about violence are to be 
drawn. The pages devoted, for example, to Lee's River George or Walter White's The Fire 
in the Flint allow for some important respective insights about lynching. But I could not 
help wishing that Bryant would address, or at least acknowledge, the differences—in the 
lyrical quality, compositional sophistication, subtlety of craft, general critical regard— 
between such minor novels and works like Native Son, Invisible Man, or Song of Solomon. 
Ultimately the book's most important contribution may be recognized by a point that 
is everywhere obvious, if never directly stated. Where numerous other critics have 
recognized the ways in which freedom and literacy are inscribed many times over as core 
values of the African-American literary tradition, Victims and Heroes establishes racial 
violence as a more conflicted, but no less pervasive trope in this same tradition. 
Kansas State University Lawrence Rodgers 
INDIVIDUALISM AND ITS DISCONTENTS: Appropriations of Emerson, 1880-1950. 
By Charles E. Mitchell. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. 1997. 
Charles Mitchell argues that between 1880 and 1950, cultural critics made a variety 
of appropriations of Emerson's thought and work, and that these readings became ways 
of talking about the complexities of individualism as a philosophy in the United States. 
Emerson became a trope for a trope, his work an entry into thinking about one of the 
thornier problems of American culture. He still performs that function for us, and Mitchell 
tells us that his work is in dialogue with that of contemporary scholars such as David Marr, 
Cornell West, and James Kloppenberg. All of these have engaged the complex topic of 
individualism using Emerson—or those whom Mitchell claims lived under Emerson's 
influence—as a focusing lens. 
Mitchell's particular take is that individualism need not be seen as necessarily 
isolating, reductionistic, or anti-social. When married to a pragmatism that values 
pluralism, both individual and cultural, the Emersonian promise of liberation, creativity, 
and self-realization is at the heart of the democratic ethos. In this, Mitchell is directly at 
odds with commentators past and present who have claimed individualism to be the death 
of community, creativity, and humane culture. He is at his best in his chapters on William 
James and W. E. B. Du Bois—and to a lesser extent, his chapter on the poet William Carlos 
Williams—as he shows the potential of one strain of the tradition spawned by Emerson to 
inspire respect for diversity. 
Mitchell believes that we need not think of an intellectual tradition as something 
linear and continuous. It is more like a beam of light refracted through a number of prisms. 
Making sense of a tradition such as that exemplified by Emerson should be less a matter 
153 
 of tracing lineal descent of ideas from one bearer of the torch to the next, and more a matter 
of seeing the variety of paths, refractions, and reflections produced by the original beam 
of light. Du Bois, for example, inherits his Emerson through James, and in so doing, builds 
on James building on Emerson, rather than on Emerson directly. One wonders with 
Williams, however, how much sense it makes to talk of him as appropriating Emerson 
when he seems to have read Emerson hardly at all. At times like these, Emerson as trope 
seems almost to disappear, and the theme of individualism in American life—the metaphor 
behind the metaphor—becomes the driving impetus of the book. 
Finally, Mitchell ends up caught between a significant commentary on the possibili­
ties and problems of American individualism (in its various forms), and a tracing of 
Emersonian family lines (in a philosophical sense) from 1880 to 1950. To the extent that 
this book engages us in thinking about the ways in which individualism and pragmatism 
can exist synergistically as a democratic ethos, it succeeds admirably. To the extent that 
it purports to add to our knowledge of an Emersonian tradition in America, it succeeds less 
well. To be fair to the author, it finally seems that the latter is only a vehicle for talking about 
the former, adopted as a necessary stratagem in a world where the monographic study still 
reigns. Who can blame Professor Mitchell, an assistant professor of American Studies at 
Elmira College, for bowing to the demands of academic life? Nevertheless, the result is a 
work split between the exigencies of moral purpose and narrow scholarly elaboration. 
Miami University Mary Kupiec Cayton 
THE IMPORTANT THINGS IN LIFE: Women, Work, and Family in Sweetwater 
County, Wyoming, 1880-1929. By Dee Garceau. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 
1997. 
As historians of women continue to explore the nuances of gender and family life in 
the American West, western myths and stereotypes continue to be challenged, if not 
discarded. Dee Garceau, assistant professor of history at Rhodes College, focuses her 
spotlight on the women of Sweetwater County, Wyoming, in the late nineteenth and early 
twentieth century. Utilizing a plethora of sources such as interviews, newspapers, 
correspondence, census data, folk songs, and memoirs, Garceau attempts to construct 
women's lives and experiences amid the myths and realities of western gender relations. 
The book offers a comparison of the ranching and mining environments in southwest­
ern Wyoming and shows how white middle class women (ranching) and working-class 
immigrant women (mining) adapted their gender roles to ensure survival and success in 
both the economic and social arenas of the family. Garceau states that for both groups, this 
adaptation "expanded women's work roles and increased their domestic authority" while 
demanding that individual achievement and personal desires take second place to group 
cohesion and cooperation (1). In both milieus, "the necessity for group cooperation 
mediated the liberalizing effects of such changes" (2). Here, she argues, the similarity of 
the womens' experience ends. 
Highlighting differences in class and ethnicity between the native-born (ranch) and 
European-born (town) women, Garceau organizes chapters around issues concerning 
family networks, courtship, marriage, and work to describe the choices, responsibilities, 
and constraints inherent in the paradox of western gender relations. For example, the reader 
is told that although immigrant women experienced the disruptive effects of long 
separations and relocation, these also afforded them the opportunity to "renegotiate the 
154 
 balance of power with their husbands" once they arrived in Wyoming (74). Likewise, 
ranching women expanded gender parameters when participating in male-dominated 
work settings but saw this gendered boundary crossing only as "service to family," not as 
a challenge to male-dominated work (89). Additionally, ranch women were almost 
exclusively barred from working with beef cattle, thus maintaining the gendered mystique 
of the "cowboy" as a male preserve. 
One of the most interesting chapters examines the myth of the single woman 
homesteader as the rural "New Woman," a counterpart to the urban, independent "New 
Woman." Garceau challenges -this myth by stating that Sweetwater County women who 
asserted their right to homestead often did so with the intent of adding to family property, 
not as a move to independence or autonomy from family responsibilities. 
Although The Important Things in Life provides insights and some interesting 
comparisons of mining women and ranching women, the book is limited by its inability 
to place these women in the larger context of American women's history or even western 
women's history. Secondary sources that would have helped create a larger context for the 
work are noticeably absent in most chapters. For some interpretations, the author relies 
exclusively on a single primary source that, although interesting and in some cases 
provocative, provides minimal support for the analysis. In view of the extensive amount 
of research in western women's history, immigrant women's history and family history 
over the last twenty years, the lack of secondary sources and a broader context is puzzling. 
In summary, Garceau does provide the reader with important threads of information 
on western women's lives. She expands the research on Wyoming women, immigrant 
women, mining women, and ranching women. Like many of her colleagues in western 
women's history, Garceau challenges the myths of the "Old West" and "[t]he assumption 
that frontier conditions liberated women because they disrupted gender roles" (159). This 
book further reinforces the importance of family and ethnic networks and gender support 
systems in women's lives, while demonstrating an alternative to the western mystique of 
rugged individualism. 
Avila College Carol K. Coburn 
NISEI/SANSEI: Shifting Japanese American Identities and Politics. By Jere Takahashi. 
Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 1997. 
In previous books on Japanese American history and culture, the political conscious­
ness and strategies of the group have appeared to be simple, sometimes to the point of 
nonexistence. The Japanese Association of America, the most important organization of 
the Issei generation, has been viewed as little more than an arm of the government in 
Tokyo, establishing Japanese language schools, issuing re-entry permits to the U.S., and 
performing other quasi-consular functions of surveillance and control. The Nisei's 
Japanese American Citizens League has been treated dismissively by post-sixties scholars 
for its acquiescence in the internment and its robust Americanism after the Pacific War. 
Even the more highly politicized Sansei have often been absorbed into the larger protest 
movements of the era of Civil Rights and the Vietnam War. 
Jere Takahashi's Nisei/Sansei gives Japanese American politics its due, placing the 
political styles of the first three generations in their historical context, analyzing the 
conditions that restricted or enabled political expression, and elaborating these styles and 
conditions through interviews with politically involved members of the second and third 
155 
 generations. What emerges is less a radically new view of the group's political history than 
a careful explication of the continuities and reformulations that have occurred over the past 
century, the "complex process where intragenerational conflict and intergenerational 
collaboration have arisen in response to changing historical circumstances"(205). 
The Issei bequeathed to the second generation a "defensive politics" born of the fact 
that they were permanently ineligible to citizenship and so lacked the right to vote, and of 
the pressure of the exclusion movement on the west coast of the United States. Their quiet 
use of selective litigation (as in the 1922 Ozawa naturalization case) carried over into the 
JACL's confidence in and use of the legal system to achieve the rights of citizens. 
Takahashi is most complete on Nisei political attitudes, rooting them throughout in 
shifting economic constraints and possibilities from the 1930s through the 1950s. The 
young Niseis' confinement to clerical and sales positions usually within the ethnic 
economy, underemployment for their educational levels, social segregation, and their 
ambivalent response to Japan's aggression in the thirties gave rise to a variety of political 
responses. At one extreme were those, like Kibei interviewee Ty Sasaki who rejected 
America. Schooled in Japan and then feeling a deep sense of alienation upon his return to 
the U.S., not accepted even by his second-generation peers, Sasaki became a pro-Japan 
"no-no boy" during his internment at Manzanar. At the other extreme were those young 
optimists who reacted to their marginalization by promoting the idea that the Nisei were 
well positioned to be a cultural bridge between the U. S. and Japan, to be interpreters of 
each society to the other. This position, which gained urgency among this group from the 
passage of the national Origins Act in 1924 (which excluded Japanese workers from the 
country), lost credibility from the mid-thirties following Japan's intensified imperialism 
in Asia. 
These two points of view were eclipsed in both the short and long terms by the two 
positions whose ongoing opposition would form the framework of subsequent Japanese 
American politics: the conservative Americanism of the JACL and the Progressivism 
initially represented by the Japanese American Young Democrats. Takahashi details the 
reasons for the Citizens League's rise to prominence in the Japanese American commu­
nity, and for the closing down of options for response as internment loomed. His generally 
sympathetic portrait of the organization minimizes the influence of "traditional" Japanese 
values and emphasizes the cogency of the Isseis' practical politics of accommodation as 
well as the Nisei leadership's desire for economic participation and the effects of racial 
prejudice in the formation of its nonpartisan position of "cooperation and concilia­
t i on"^ ) . The Progressives, taking their cue from thirties labor activism and New Deal 
ideology, in contrast to the JACL, spoke and worked for labor and racial equality and were 
quick to condemn Japanese militarism. 
Under the stresses of war and internment these latter positions merged, the Progressives ' 
"critical cooperation" gradually giving place to the JACL's policy of "constructive 
cooperation" with the internment program as the Citizens League, through the effective 
promotion of its ideas and the U.S. government's overt support, became the dominant 
voice of the Nisei. And since the camp experience destroyed the authority of the Issei, this 
was the voice of Japanese Americans. Takahashi's discussion of the various ways in which 
the government advanced the status of the JACL contributes to a more complete 
understanding of the ideological forces that have influenced the directions of Asian 
American (and, more generally, minority) politics. These assimilationist forces continued 
to shape the direction of Japanese American politics in the Cold War period as the group 
experienced economic advancement, and the League worked for equality initiatives such 
156 
 as the (flawed) McCarran-Walter immigration law. However, Progressivism survived the 
war, retaining its commitment to collective solutions to community problems and to 
diversity, and in a small but significant way opened a political space for Sansei activism 
in the sixties and after. 
The stories of Fred Ichiyama and Linda Miyano, in the most affecting interviews in 
the text, detail the high optimism and subsequent retrenchment of the Sanseis' moment of 
radicalization. While, as Takahashi notes, most of the third generation remained loyal to 
the dominant "reform and gradualism" political style, a significant number of the young, 
inspired by the Black Power movement and intoxicated with the possibility of Third World 
solidarity, brought about lasting changes in the politics and sense of identity of Japanese 
American communities. Working through organizations such as the Asian American 
Political Alliance, their efforts to achieve both institutional access and an effective 
community-based politics, as well as to advance pan-Asian understanding and coopera­
tion, resulted in the estabhshment of ethnic organizations and programs (such as Asian 
American Studies courses and departments in universities across the nation), and a 
recovery of the history and identity of the Japanese in the U. S. In the wake of these 
achievements, Ichiyama and Miyano retain their commitment to community control and 
an ethnic politics, Miyano the more confident that the Progressive political viewpoint will 
endure, even thrive. 
One finds little to fault in Nisei/Sansei. Perhaps the political diversity has not been 
quite as "rich" as the author claims, having been coterminous with and legitimized by 
mainstream political passions and strategies. And the impact of the shifting relations 
between America and Japan, from being wary friends to bitter enemies to Cold War allies 
and economic rivals, remains uninvestigated. Yet Takahashi's balanced and comprehen­
sive text enlarges our knowledge of continuities in the political thinking of the Japanese 
Americans in this century, the heavy constraints under which their politics matured, and 
the intragroup debates that occurred as they responded to an often hostile political and 
economic environment beyond their communities. 
Temple University Japan William J. Clark 
BLACKFACE, WHITE NOISE: Jewish Immigrants in the Hollywood Melting Pot. By 
Michael Rogin. Berkeley: University of California Press. 1996. 
Michael Rogin's provocative Blackface, White Noise is an important, challenging 
addition to the ever-growing literature on Black-Jewish relations, and a welcome addition 
to a more recent spate of studies focusing on blackface minstrelsy. Rogin's study focuses 
largely on what he calls the "racial masquerade" or "racial cross-dressing" within early and 
classical Hollywood cinema with a nod to more recent American films still working in 
racialized and racist modes. Even more specifically, his interest lies in the use of blackface 
by Jewish performers and filmmakers. Ranging across both the predictable cinematic 
examples, especially The Jazz Singer ( 1927), and other films with and about Al Jolson, and 
more forgotten films and figures, such as Eddie Cantor, once among the most important 
Hollywood stars, Rogin draws convincing connections between troubling, long-standing 
American cultural conundrums revolving around race and racism and their appearance in 
mainstream popular entertainment. 
Rogin's basic thesis is a now-accepted, or at least acceptable, one in historical cultural 
studies: that white ethnics entered the American mainstream by disavowing ties to 
157 
 racialized others, and that the American mainstream, the Melting Pot, could accept white 
ethnics only at the expense, especially, of African Americans (Cf. David Roediger's The 
Wages of Whiteness). Jews have long occupied a kind of liminal position as a group that 
is at once religious, ethnic and racial—acceptable or troubling depending on social and 
historical context. Rogin's point is that Jews both identified with and disavowed connec­
tions to America's most troubling Other: Blacks. Thus Jews have both expressed a 
solidarity with African Americans and have participated in the racialized Othering of 
African Americans, and the arena where this is expressed both overtly and more covertly 
is the Hollywood cinema, the special province of American Jews. 
In the contemporary era, few deny the racist roots of blackface entertainment and 
Rogin' s study should certainly put to rest any doubts about the essentially exclusionary and 
harmful effects of that mode. In its day, of course, blackface was not always or even often 
associated with racism. It was an accepted convention of both the late 19th and early 20th 
century, so much so that even Black entertainers would apply the burnt cork to "black up." 
To some performers it may have appeared as an act of solidarity, a homage to Black 
entertainers denied the kind of attention the white performer enjoyed. Thus Fred Astaire' s 
dazzling, but troubling number "Bojangles of Harlem" in Swing Time (1936) or Bing 
Crosby's blackface number in Holiday Inn (1942). Rogin will have none of that. There is 
little to praise in blackface and much to condemn: earlier critics of blackface "dwell 
insufficiently both on the exclusion of actual African Americans from their own represen­
tations and on the grotesque, demeaning animalistic blackface mask" (37). And unlike 
earlier analysts, Rogin concentrates on the particular affinity, so to speak, that Jewish 
entertainers held for blackface. Jolson and Cantor, George Jessel and George Burns, 
Sophie Tucker and Fanny Brice; and in music, the compositions of Irving Berlin and 
George Gershwin (strangely forgetting Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II). 
Furthermore, Rogin shows that a kind of "blackface" retained its power in Hollywood long 
after actual burnt cork was no longer used, in the performances of Blacks in Hollywood 
films of the 30s and 40s which amounted to a kind of figurative blackface as they took on 
roles directly out of the minstrel tradition of the 19th century. 
Rogin's most provocative and compelling insight revolves around the contention that 
Hollywood experienced a number of transformative moments in its history. These are 
"moments that combine box office success, critical recognition of revolutionary signifi­
cance, formal innovations, and shifts in the cinematic mode of production," and that such 
moments "all organized themselves around the surplus symbolic value of blacks, the 
power to make African Americans represent something beside themselves" (14). For 
Rogin these moments revolve around the release of Uncle Tom's Cabin (1903), The Birth 
of a Nation (1915), The Jazz Singer (1927) and Gone with the Wind (1939). There is no 
doubt about the foundational importance of the last three mentioned films and certainly 
Uncle Tom's Cabin, along with Edwin S. Porter' s other films of that immediate period, The 
Great Train Robbery and The Life of An American Fireman went a good distance to 
establishing the primacy of the narrative tradition of commercial cinema. Clearly, it is 
more than coincidental that these films revolve around race in both poignant and troubling 
manners. Is it a coincidence, however, that the films were released in 12-year increments? 
I have no answer to that question, and, moreover, it seems to me that similarly momentous 
events in Hollywood's history do not seem to occur in subsequent dozens of years. Thus, 
Rogin's strongest arguments are found in the sections of the book examining Hollywood's 
efforts in the period 1915-1930 to organize itself as an industry charged with delivering 
American ideals to newly Americanized citizens. 
158 
 Certainly his strongest chapter is the one from which the book itself derives its title, 
"Blackface, White Noise." Originally published in Critical Inquiry (18 spring 1992), this 
essay is the most heavily footnoted and the most thoroughly convincing. It is the definitive 
reading of The Jazz Singer through the lens of race and ethnicity, though it would be 
interesting to juxtapose this essay with Krin Gabbard's psychoanalytic take on the film in 
his simultaneously published Jammin ' at the Margins: Jazz and the American Cinema 
(University of Chicago Press). The Jewish dimensions of blackface entertainment and the 
stake of the emerging Jewish investment in Hollywood come together in Rogin's reading 
of one of the most influential films in Hollywood's history. 
If there is perhaps more preliminary material than the book needs in the first three 
chapters, the remaining sections of the book read blackface and minstrelsy as far more 
pervasive in Hollywood's far from-proud record on race. Rogin's book essentially 
concludes in the immediate postwar era, though he mentions in passing more recent films 
like Made in America, Corinna, Corinna and Forrest Gump as continuing a race-based 
blackface tradition. One wonders what Rogin' s take would be on more contemporary films 
which have achieved blockbuster status in which race is virtually eliminated like Star Wars 
(its sequels notwithstanding), ET and Titanic in which the absence of African Americans 
is as striking as their absence in classical Hollywood? For what Rogin fails to remember 
is that, despite the perniciousness of blackface entertainment and minstrelsy-derived 
stereotypes on screen, for the most part as far as classic Hollywood was concerned, 
America was white. Not Jewish, not Black, certainly not Native and Latino, everyone who 
was anyone was white. Have things changed? 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign David Desser 
MAX LERNER: Pilgrim in the Promised Land. By Sanford Lakoff. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press. 1998. 
YOUNG SIDNEY HOOK: Marxist and Pragmatist. By Christopher Phelps. Ithaca 
London: Cornell University Press. 1997. 
As an anti-Stalinist radical in 1939, Sidney Hook wrote a highly critical essay on the 
Popular Front. The essay, one of Hook's last pieces of radical writing, used Max Lerner's 
It is Later Than You Think to expose the theoretical and political weaknesses of the Popular 
Front. Twenty years later Hook and Lerner were part of the liberal anti-Communist milieu 
of the 1950s. In another twenty odd years the two would be supporting Ronald Reagan. 
If there is a commonality about where Hook and Lerner ended, there were clear 
differences in where they started. In Young Sidney Hook: Marxist and Pragmatist, 
Christopher Phelps makes a major contribution to our understanding of Hook and the 
American Marxist tradition with his extremely insightful analysis of Hook's often brilliant 
attempt to fuse Marxism and pragmatism. Phelps argues against those critics who have 
seen Hook's pragmatism as the cause of his desertion of Marxism and radical left politics: 
"he had . . . drawn on pragmatism . . . defending the revolutionary socialist tradition of 
action, organization, and workers' control as superior to both social democratic and 
Stalinist varieties of fatalism." Phelps believes that Hook's interpretation of an activist 
pragmatism was central to his efforts to develop a non-mechanistic Marxist philosophy of 
"social action." Through a careful analysis of Hook's writings and his political engage­
ments in the 1920s and early 1930s Phelps is able to show how Hook's synthesis of 
pragmatism and Marxism provided him with the intellectual framework for radical 
159 
 political activity. Although Hook's political activism would decline in the late 1930s, 
Phelps demonstrates that Hook played an important role in uniting the American Workers 
Party and the Trotskyist Communist League of America in 1934, and, later, in bringing the 
Trotskyists into the Socialist Party in 1936. 
I believe that Phelps is correct in stressing Hook's radical activism. But, whereas 
Phelps apparently believes the American Workers Party/Trotskyist fusion was a positive 
move, and whereas he apparently blames the Socialist Party leadership entirely for the 
failure of Socialist Party/Trotskyist union, I am more skeptical of the benefits of the first 
fusion and see the expulsion of the Trotskyists from the Socialist Party as not necessarily 
justified, but as more complicated than the story Phelps tells. However, these are political 
judgments on the wisdom of Hook's choices, not arguments against Phelps's stress on 
Hook's radical activism. 
Phelps focuses his work on the early Sidney Hook, but he does discuss his later Cold 
War liberalism and eventual support of Reagan. He locates Hook's turn away from 
revolutionary socialism not in his pragmatism, but in how Hook chose to meet the crisis 
for radicals in the late thirties. With the full revelations of the nature of Stalinism, with the 
rise of fascism abroad, and with setbacks for labor in 1938, it became harder to maintain 
revolutionary socialist hopes. In this milieu of dashed hopes, Phelps argues, Hook's 
anti-Stalinism swallowed up his revolutionary socialism. Although there remains work to 
be done on the "older" Sidney Hook, Phelps's explanation is more convincing than those 
analyses that would locate Hook's shift in his continued adherence to pragmatism. 
Sanford Lakoff ' s Max Lerner: Pilgrim in the Promised Land is a full-scale biography 
of Lerner. Unlike Hook who left relatively few personal papers, Lerner left many, and 
Lakoff is as concerned with Lerner's personal pilgrimage as he is with his political 
pilgrimage. Politically, Lakoff traces Lerner's evolution from his Veblenist, quasiMarxist
writings of the 1920s and early 1930s to his Popular Front/New Deal liberalism 
of the late 1930s, and then to his emergence as a cold war liberal in the 1950s—and 
ultimately to his support for Reagan in the 1980s. Personally, Lakoff discusses his 
unsuccessful first marriage, his numerous early affairs, his more successful second 
marriage, his continued affairs, and ultimately his friendship with Hugh Hefner and his 
association with the Playboy dimension of the sexual revolution. 
In accounting for Lerner's change from a critical left/liberal to a celebrator of 
American Civilization and supporter of the cold war, Lakoff places a great deal of 
emphasis on the opening up of American society—particularly the university—to second 
generation Jewish intellectuals in the post-World War II period. Undoubtedly Lerner 
believed that this change was symptomatic of a general opening up and democratizing of 
American society, and that belief goes a long way to explain the difference between the 
critical edge in Lerner's early writing and even in It Is Later Than You Think (1939) and 
the far more roseate view in his encyclopedia of celebration, America as Civilization 
(1957). While it is important to recognize that there were areas of positive change in 
post-World War II United States, it is also important to recognize that Lerner's success as 
a journalist and as a university teacher made such a self-referential person as Lerner a poor 
judge of the nature of post-war society. Lakoff s failure to stress adequately the analytical 
inadequacies resulting from Lerner's self-absorption results in a far too positive evaluation 
of Lerner's intellectual history. Lakoff s study is not uncritical, but in the end, he skirts 
what I believe is essential in understanding Lerner and his evolution: his tendency to ride 
with the intellectual tide and, at the same time, to avoid positions that risked completely 
cutting himself off from the seats of political power. Lerner's early Veblenist/Marxist 
reading of American society pointed him toward a radical break with liberal reform; yet 
160 
 he made certain not to become too far removed from New Deal liberalism. He was a 
Popular Front supporter and a Russian sympathizer when they were strong currents in the 
liberal intellectual community, but he couched his support and sympathy in terms that 
protected him from accusations of being too uncritical in his commitments. During the 
war, he, along with much of the liberal community, was constantly frustrated by 
Roosevelt's foreign policy, but he took care to avoid a break with Roosevelt. He wavered 
between the ADA and the PC A in 1947 and between Truman and Wallace in 1948. One 
can't help but feel he was anxious to see which way the liberal winds were blowing. As 
the liberal intellectual community moved into the cold war camp in the 1950s, Lemer 
moved with it. And finally, as the trend within the intellectual community moved to 
conservatism and neo-conservatism in the 1970s and 1980s, Lemer kept pace, but always 
making certain he didn't divorce himself too far from liberal values. Even his Hugh 
Hefner-style sexual rebellion was the stylish rebellion of the trendy—not the risk-taking 
rebellion of the young, which Lerner continually put down. This desire to be au courant 
with intellectual trends, to be intellectually "advanced," but never to alienate anyone or 
anything (unless it was the student revolt of the 1960s—and here it appears as if his pique 
derived from being perceived as an old fogey), can be seen in his obsequious letters to 
intellectual friends and foes. At one point Lakoff notes this quality, but he does not tie it 
to the larger dimension of his pilgrimage. To do so would have added a more critical 
evaluation to what is a thoughtful and solid work. But it is a critical evaluation which, I 
believe, Lerner fully deserves. 
Queens College Frank Warren 
THE TALKIES: American Cinema's Transition to Sound, 1926-1931. By Donald 
Crafton. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. 1997. 
Few historians are capable of addressing the full range of a subject's evolution. In The 
Talkies: American Cinema's Transition to Sound, 1926-1931, Donald Crafton discusses 
the technological, industrial, and cultural creation and impact of sound in motion pictures. 
His all-encompassing, multi-linear approach to one of the pivotal turning points in screen 
history makes this the seminal work in this field and one of the strongest volumes in 
Scribner's History of the American Cinema series. 
Crafton argues in his introduction that "it is difficult to think of a more profound 
discrepancy between popular and academic discourses" in terms of the transition of motion 
pictures from silent to sound (3). Most Americans either accept the notion of crisis within 
the film industry as colorfully depicted in the classic film Singin in the Rain or they ascribe 
to the belief that The Jazz Singer instantly pushed silent films into obscurity. Crafton 
rejects both concepts. Instead, he emphasizes "the longevity—not the suddenness—of the 
transition to sound" (4). 
The author does not utilize the business genius/pivotal star approach, which has 
remained the dominant organizational paradigm in the field and has recently been revisited 
in Scott Eyman's The Speed of Sound. Instead, the author emphasizes the multitude of 
players involved in the industry's acceptance of sound in film—the technicians and 
inventors, the studio heads and creative artists, the popular press and film critics and the 
motion picture audience. It is this complex approach thatmakes this volume groundbreaking. 
After a brief introduction and a helpful chronology of the major cinematic events of 
the period 1926-1931, Crafton's volume is divided into three major sections. Section One, 
161 
 "A New Era in Electrical Equipment," is a detailed industrial and technological history of 
the medium's gradual acceptance of sound. One of the author's major arguments is that 
motion picture sound technology borrowed from many different electrical industries— 
telephone, radio, television, and recording. In a chapter entitled "The Big Hedge," Crafton 
illustrates the industry's reluctance to rush wholeheartedly into sound film production. 
Remakes, goat glands (silent films retrofilled with movie and sound effects), dual silent 
and sound versions of films, and part talkies all demonstrate that motion pictures mildly 
flirted with the idea of sound in film in the period 1926-1929. Companies were also dealing 
with a significant problem; the fact that the majority of theaters across the country were 
not wired for sound. Quasi-talkie films were therefore pragmatic; they could play in both 
sound-equipped and silent theaters. 
Section Two is an artistic and technical examination of three seasons of filmmaking 
from 1928-1931. Crafton exquisitely manages to combine several major themes into a 
fascinating narrative. Foremost, he demonstrates the industry's early exploitation and 
mismanagement of sound in film. Early audience reaction was spectacular but soon faded 
due to filmmakers' overemphasis on sound and the growing effects of the Depression. This 
process culminated in the development of the "well-tempered soundtrack," a maturing of 
filmmakers' modulated use of the voice in film production. A second critically important 
concept is the examination of the major and minor studios' use of sound in film. The 
diversity of company policies prove that there was not a unified approach to the new 
technology. 
Section Three addresses Crafton's concept of audienceship—"the interaction be­
tween active and discriminate moviegoers, the film production system and the external 
pressures affecting the dynamic" (443). His consideration of film spectatorship and 
historical documentation is important for those working in film studies. 
The Talkies is not perfect. Crafton largely ignores the impact of sound upon 
independent black film production. But his thorough research, impeccable documentation, 
groundbreaking box office discoveries, well-crafted narrative, and ample illustrations 
create a volume which is as fascinating and complex as the period of film which it covers. 
Donnelly College Gerald R. Butters, Jr. 
HOLLYWOOD RENAISSANCE: The Cinema of Democracy in the Era of Ford, Capra, 
and Kazan. By Sam Girgus. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
The tumultuous time period between 1939 and 1966, an era of bloody war and intense 
ideological battles, also marked a period of renaissance within the Hollywood film 
industry argues Sam Girgus in his latest book. Girgus, a Professor of English at Vanderbilt 
University, believes that the great film directors of the Hollywood studio system—Frank 
Capra, John Ford, Howard Hawks, Elia Kazan, George Stevens, Jr. and Fred Zinnemann, 
made a series of films which he labels as "a cinema for democracy." 
These auteurs, he argues, worked during a time frame in which American ideals were 
threatened by anti-democratic forces and films such as The Searchers, Mr. Smith Goes to 
Washington, High Noon and On the Waterfront helped Americans define values that were 
the core of the American experience. Girgus selected these particular directors, to the 
exclusion of others working in the same era, because they were "instrumental in creating 
a special period of artistic innovation in American cultural and film history" (177). 
Girgus begins his book with a discussion of literary critic F. O. Matthiessen who 
saw in his 1930s study of Ralph Waldo Emerson, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Herman Melville, 
162 
 Henry David Thoreau and Walt Whitman an American renaissance of literature. 
Using Matthieseen as a model, Girgus constructs another renaissance of democracy 
in Hollywood. 
The Hollywood Renaissance begins in 1939 with the release of Gone With the Wind, 
a film "that represents the triumph of the classic Hollywood system," and ends in 1966 
because, the following year films "radically challenged many Hollywood conventions of 
cast, theme, and presentation to reconsider sexuality, violence, and family in America" (7). 
The body of the book consists of individual chapters on each of the key directors. On 
Ford, Girgus writes a long, critical analysis of The Searchers, a film that has fascinated film 
theorists for decades. To Girgus the film is "Ford's greatest single example of a cinema for 
democracy . . ." (55). Capra's contribution to the renaissance is detailed through yet 
another revisiting of Mr. Smith Goes to Washington and It's a Wonderful Life. Girgus 
argues that both films need to be reevaluated because they "dramatically contradict that 
notion of cinema as an art form that predetermines content and subject regarding women 
and gender." The strong female characters in both films "challenge the assumption of the 
inherent bias of the cinema toward the demeaning display of women" (103). 
To this reader Girgus' concept of a Hollywood Renaissance in American culture 
based on a handful of films by a few directors is highly arbitrary. Whose view of American 
is represented on the screen? The fact that Capra had a few strong female characters in some 
of his films does not call into question the overriding historical evidence of the demeaning 
nature of the presentation of women in film during this era of a so-called Hollywood 
renaissance. 
The book is interesting, even fascinating at times, but it requires a reader who 
completely buys into Girgus' pronouncements of opinion. The directors selected, and 
especially the films chosen for analysis have been studied and re-studied so many times 
by so many film scholars that the book seems almost out-dated. 
The time frame of this renaissance also strikes me as curious and capricious. From 
1939 to 1966 was precisely the period of the most severe censorship in Hollywood. While 
Girgus never mentions censorship, his directors complained bitterly about it. 
Girgus may believe, as many film scholars do, that the censorship system was not all 
that important. Fair enough. But he at least needs to acknowledge that it existed and make 
an argument for why it had little or no impact on the work of these directors. 
University of Missouri-Kansas City Gregory D. Black 
WRITING WOMEN'S COMMUNITIES: The Politics and Poetics of Contemporary 
Multi-Genre Anthologies. By Cynthia G. Franklin. Madison: University of Wisconsin 
Press. 1997. 
Cherrfe Moraga and Gloria Anzaldua's 1981 anthology, This Bridge Called My 
Back: Writings by Radical Women of Color, marked a signal event in U.S. feminist writing, 
and a challenge which academic "white"-identified theory has still (seventeen years later) 
only partially met. Drawing on their own identities as marginalized U.S.women of color, 
the contributors employ a variety of genres—including journal entries, letters, notes, 
transcribed conversations, essays, and poetry—both to expose their exclusion from 
previous definitions of womanhood and to create new forms of oppositional community. 
In Writing Women's Communities Cynthia G. Franklin explores This Bridge's ongoing 
significance, as well as its impact on the development of a "new literary movement." 
163 
 According to Franklin, the use of multiple genres destabilizes other identity-based 
boundaries; creates unified communities that acknowledge many (but not all) of the 
differences among marginalized women; critiques and provides alternatives to academic 
writing; and exposes readers to conflicting views on a single issue. 
Franklin provides close readings of a number of multi-genre anthologies to under­
score the paradoxical nature of identity politics: On the one hand, it allows previously 
excluded groups to create new forms of inclusionary communities; on the other hand, 
identity politics itself depends on exclusions. Consequently, "any practice of identity 
politics necessarily ends up excluding, marginalizing, or strategically stabilizing some 
aspect of identity that it purports to represent." 
Reading paired sets of anthologies, Franklin explores the various ways this paradox 
impacts community-building efforts. In Chapter Two she reads This Bridge in dialogue 
with Making Face, Making Soul/Haciendo Caras to analyze the strategies marginalized 
women have developed to create cohesive, identity-based communities by defining 
themselves against dominant ("white," middle-class, academic) communities which have 
excluded them. In Chapter Three she puts Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology in 
conversation with Nice Jewish Girls: A LesbianAnthology to examine the ways marginalized 
women define themselves from within their larger, already marginalized communities. In 
Chapter Four Franklin reads Making Waves: An Anthology of Writing by and about Asian 
American Women and The Forbidden Stitch: An Asian American Women (s Anthology to 
explore the possibilities and limitations of creating nonassimilationist inclusionary com­
munities that do not employ oppositional, exclusionary strategies. 
In Chapter Five Franklin moves beyond an exclusive focus on U.S. writings to 
investigate the similarities and differences between U.S. and British working-class 
women's community building. Reading Calling Home: Working Class Women's Writings 
in dialogue with The Common Thread: Writings by Working-Class Women and Charting 
the Journey: Writings by Black and Third World Women, she demonstrates that apparent 
exclusions, such as those of Britain's rigid class structure, can facilitate the development 
of inclusionary communities of marginalized women. 
In the final chapter Franklin presents both a critique and an expansion of the identity 
politics described in the previous chapters. Charting the shift to a politics of location, she 
demonstrates the increasingly important roles nation and location play in more recent 
anthologies. Through an analysis of The Very Inside: An Anthology of Writing by Asianand 
Pacific Islander Lesbian and Bisexual Women and Returning the Gift: Poetry and Prose 
from the First North American Native Writers' Festival, Franklin argues for the impor­
tance of developing "coalitional communities" that draw on yet go beyond identity-based 
politics to create new forms of volitional alliances that acknowledge without reifying 
identity categories such as color, class, sexuality, and gender. 
The subject of Writing Women's Communities is innovative and timely. These 
anthologies have played a crucial role in redefining academic, "white"-identified femi­
nism. Yet as Franklin points out, scholars have not sufficiently examined the inner 
dynamics of the anthologies themselves. Thus her analysis performs an important service 
for other scholars. And although Franklin does not focus on pedagogical issues, throughout 
Writing Women's Communities she reminds readers of the role identity politics and other 
identity-based issues continue to play in the classroom. These reminders underscore the 
political implications and the relevance of Franklin's argument. 
Eastern New Mexico University AnaLouise Keating 
164 
 BLACK CHANT: Languages of African-American Postmodernism. By Aldon Lynn 
Nielsen. New York: Cambridge University Press. 1996. 
Critic Aldon Lynn Nielsen, a professor of English at San Jose State University, has 
written a complex modern study which examines the transformation of African American 
literature, and especially the contributions and roles of black poets, in the period from 
World War II to the present. Nielsen's major goal is to capture the essence of black writers 
from the areas known as modernism and postmodernism, by focusing critical attention on 
various groups of avant-garde poets. Namely, in Washington, D.C.—the Howard/Dasein 
poets (LeRoy Stone, Percy Johnston, Dolores Kendrick, Lance Jeffers, Oswald Govan, 
Joseph White, and others); from Cleveland, Ohio—the Free Lance Group (including 
Russell Atkins, Helen Collins, Casper LeRoy Jordan, Adelaide Simon, a white woman, 
and others); and among others, the New York City group—the Umbra poets (with such key 
writers as Lloyd Addison, Calvin Hernton, David Henderson, Raymond Patterson, Tom 
Dent, Askia Muhammed Toure, Jane Logan, Lorenzo Thomas, and Brenda Walcott, 
among others). Other poets who also play a prominent role in modern black poetry appear 
in this book, with the author's assessment of such ground breaking writers as A. B. 
Spellman, Amiri Baraka, Elouise Loftin, Eugene Redmond, Langston Hughes, Sterling 
Brown, Melvin B. Toison, Bob Kaufman, Gwendolyn Brooks, and Harryette Mullen. 
Nielsen's work closely studies the experimental and radical nature of the new writing 
produced by modern black poets, and relates these developments with other currents in 
American literature, such as the Beat Generation, and especially the influence of black 
music (with an emphasis on jazz) on the poetics of black and other American writers. A 
large segment of the book explores the poetry recordings by black avant-garde poets, such 
as Amiri Baraka, Elouise Loftin, and Jayne Cortez, who, along with such figures as Nikki 
Giovanni, Gil Scott-Heron, and the Last Poets, helped to greatly expand the poetic and 
musical combinations of the recorded word and records in the modern era. 
Black Chant also highlights the tremendous achievements of modern black poetry to 
American life, as witnessed with the creative energies of the Black Arts Movement, the 
dozens of outstanding black literary magazines of the period, the work of over a hundred 
significant editors, such as Dudley Randall at Broadside Press, Haki R. Madhubuti, 
Carolyn Rodgers and Johari A. Amini-Hudson at Third World Press, and among so many 
others, Hoyt W. Fuller and Carole A. Parks at Negro Digest/Black World. Nielsen also 
points out, however, the general lack of appreciation by many critics, readers, and the 
public for this creative work. Nonetheless, the author offers contemporary readers and 
students alike a grand opportunity to capture in one book, a profound examination of 
modern currents in black poetry in America. Black Chant is a well researched book, and 
a welcome addition to the critical studies available on modern black literature. 
University of Missouri, Columbia Julius E. Thompson 
TRADE AND THE AMERICAN DREAM: A Social History of Postwar Trade Policy. By 
Susan Ariel Aaronson. Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky. 1996. 
In the aftermath of the Cold War and the much heralded triumph of market economics, 
Americans as well as the rest of the world must confront the realities of an international 
economy subject to impersonal (and extra national) market forces. The Asian economic 
crisis and subsequent meltdown of financial markets around the globe have cast doubt in 
165 
 the minds of many about the advantages of free trade and free financial flows, and have 
brought the heart of the matter—concerns about sovereignty—to the fore. As a result, 
understanding how the international trading system moved from a 1930s world of isolated 
economies protected by tariff walls and a plethora of other barriers to the World Trade 
Organization of the 1990s is important if we are to avoid a return to conditions that 
exacerbated the Great Depression. 
The story of postwar efforts to reform world trade is told by Susan Ariel Aaronson 
in Trade and the American Dream. Her account begins with the 1934 Reciprocal Trade 
Agreements Act, the foundation for U.S. free trade policies, developed during the 
depression as a way to keep the American Dream alive. The first two-thirds of Aaronson's 
work weaves the tale of wartime planning efforts and thinking about the needs of the 
postwar world to provide an understanding of the forces working within the country to both 
further and frustrate efforts to free trade from its prewar constraints. Throughout, we are 
constantly reminded of policy makers' failure to explain to working Americans why free 
trade was necessary and to involve them in meaningful ways in the policy making process. 
As a result, reforms envisioned for the international trading system in the immediate 
postwar years did not materialize while efforts to restructure the international financial 
system succeeded with the formation of the International Monetary Fund and the 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, now the World Bank. 
The failure to establish the International Trade Organization (ITO), however, was not 
a fatal blow to free trade. The "temporary" General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT), through various rounds of negotiations spanning almost fifty years, set the stage 
for U.S. approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in 1993 and the 
World Trade Organization (WTO) in 1994. Aaronson's treatment of NAFTA and the 
WTO in about thirty pages at the end of her work does little justice to the issues or the 
debates regarding free trade in the 1990s, yet supports her stress on the importance of 
cultivating popular support if public policy measures are to succeed. 
Although Aaronson proposes to give us A Social History of Postwar Trade Policies, 
her book does not live up to the promise of its subtitle. There is little social history in her 
tale of the successes and failures of public policy making in the critical years following the 
end of the Second World War. For example, eight of the book's ten tables list proponents 
and opponents of various trade measures yet the text makes no meaningful use of this 
information and the reader is left wondering what to make of the lists, what role various 
individuals and organizations played, and in what ways, if any, the players changed as the 
U.S. moved toward rejecting the ITO. 
Trade and the American Dream is an insightful and useful study of the public policy 
making process. Aaronson's work should be read by scholars in American studies, 
economics, history, public policy and other disciplines to enrich their understanding of the 
immediate postwar period, and will be a valuable supplement for lectures in courses 
focusing on the postwar U.S. 
College of William and Mary Clyde Haulman 
CANCER FROM BEEF: DES, Federal Food Regulation, and Consumer Confidence. By 
Alan I. Marcus. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 1994. 
In Cancer From Beef: DES, Federal Food Regulation, and Consumer Confidence, 
historian Alan I. Marcus tells the story of the rise and fall of a substance central to the 
history of recent regulation. When DES's efficacy as a cattle growth hormone was 
166 
 discovered in 1954, the beef industry was revolutionized. By introducing tiny amounts of 
this chemical into feed, cattlemen significantly increased the weight growth rate of cattle 
and substantially cut feeding costs. Others, however, warned of an uninvited guest at the 
chemical feast—cancer. In 1956 physician William E. Smith publicized studies suggest­
ing that DES was a carcinogen. Smith's work caught the attention of Congressman James 
Delaney (D.-N.Y.), who included a clause in the 1958 Food and Drug Act amendment that 
prohibited adding artificial carcinogenic substances to food. Shortly thereafter, a beefed 
up FDA took medicated feeds under its purview and probably expended more resources 
regulating DES than any other substance. In the 1960s, which were marked by aggressive 
environmental and consumer movements, advocacy journalism, and lifestyle politics, the 
DES controversy became linked to critiques of industrial society, concerns about food 
safety, and medical tragedies such as thalidomide babies and DES-daughter cancers. 
Given the scientific uncertainties of determining DES's carcinogenicity, all concerned 
parties (agri-business, pharmaceutical companies, government agencies, agricultural 
university scientists, consumer advocates, lawyers, and legislators) could invoke studies 
favorable to their position while dismissing those of opponents. In the FDA's final decision 
to ban DES as a cattle growth enhancer in 1979, political priorities—rather than scientific 
agreement about its dangers—were decisive. 
The larger meaning of DES's downfall, according to Marcus, resides in the erosion 
of an earlier style of regulation characterized by "progressive partnership." This partner­
ship between government, academia, industry, and the public (operative from the 1920s 
to the 1950s) revolved around a faith in scientific expertise and an appreciation for 
science's material benefits. DES itself illustrated the partnership: "A college scientist 
uncovered a new technique, pharmaceutical scientists produced the drug, 
feed-manufacturing scientists compounded the material as a premix, federal scientists 
approved its use, agricultural scientists publicized it by demonstrating its utility, and 
farmers made use of it" (25). Elements of the cultural crucible of the late 1950s and the 
1960s—individualism, a mistrust of traditional authority, and a culture of entitlement/ 
victimization—dissolved the partnership. The media became a forum for scientific 
disputes, and regulation became litigious and proactive. Political infighting at governmen­
tal agencies also signaled a new era of "regulation as opposition." Eventually a "new 
synthesis" emerged in the 1970s, enshrined in cost-benefit analysis, which acknowledged 
"regulatory relativism." Championed by scientists as a way of preserving their regulatory 
authority, cost-benefit analysis had the opposite effect since costs and benefits could be 
variously defined, keeping everybody in the regulatory game. (For urban middle-class 
activists, regulation was a kind of intramural sport—the only losers were the 
non-participants.) 
The strength of Marcus's book is its analysis of the premises and networks of the 
progressive partnership. The book also provides a valuable account of the transformation 
of the FDA. Less convincing, however, is Marcus's treatment of the new regulatory 
synthesis. For example, Marcus neglects the extent to which cost-benefit analysis often 
served as an industry tool since economic benefits are easier to quantify than social costs. 
And while Marcus is right to decry the polarization and disregard for scientific truth that 
often characterizes contemporary regulatory debate, he is perhaps too nostalgic for an 
earlier era. Negligible health risks such as DES in beef and Alar may have been 
exaggerated after the demise of the progressive partnership, but real health menaces such 
as cigarettes and asbestos flourished under it. 
On the whole, however, Cancer From Beef is judicious and well-written. Moreover, 
it draws upon an impressive variety of published and archival sources; few readers will be 
167 
 tempted to ask "Where's the beef?" The book is indispensable reading for anyone 
interested in the history of recent public health, the consumer movement, and government 
regulation. 
Johns Hopkins University Keith Barbera 
REEL TO REAL: Race, Sex and Class at the Movies. By bell hooks. New York: 
Routledge. 1996. 
For more than two decades now film has provided fertile terrain for feminist critique. 
With its emphasis on equal rights, the 1970s wave of the women's movement raised a 
number of important questions concerning the way cinematic representation reflects and 
conserves patriarchal myth. Although the movement fostered a consideration of the 
relationship between aesthetic practices and the subordination of women, its failure to take 
into account race, class, or ethnic differences limited its appeal for women of color. 
"History repeats itself," some might argue, for it wasn't until Sojourner Truth spoke out 
in 1851 that white feminists began to seriously consider female difference(s). With Ain't 
IA Woman ? (1981) hooks echoed the refrain from the historic speech Truth presented at 
the women's convention in Akron, Ohio. This book along with Angela Davis's Women, 
Race & Class (1981) raised the ante and set the theoretical foundation for what many critics 
now refer to as the third wave of women's resistance in this country. Reel to Real: Race, 
Sex and Class at the Movies (1996) augments the discursive agenda, making it apparent 
that bell hooks has once again stepped forward to raise the political stakes. 
Reel to Real explodes a variety of contemporary concerns by juxtaposing issues 
related to gender, theory, and genre. The structure and style of this book differs from the 
typical scholarly or descriptive discussion of film; nevertheless the text addresses a 
number of the cultural, theoretical, and pedagogical issues of the day. As in her other work 
hooks actively interrogates culture in personal terms, enticing readers to contemplate 
"difference" along with the dual concepts of heterogeneity and multiplicity. In many ways 
"hetereogeneity" and "multiplicity" ground and shape this text in that the concepts are 
repeatedly evoked by every aspect of its production. Aside from its emphasis on race, class, 
and gender differences, this innovative and integrative book structurally pairs critics with 
cultural producers, autobiography with criticism, men with women, and blacks with 
whites. From the cultural commentary of Spike Lee's Girl 6 and Crooklyn hooks develops 
an analysis that ruminates on "racial representation" from both sides of the screen 
considering audience expectations as well as the predicament confronting black filmmak­
ers . She suggests that because, "Audiences are so accustomed to representations that depict 
the brutal death of black folks in Hollywood films that no one is outraged when our bodies 
are violently slaughtered." This book, unlike the typical cinematic critique, moves beyond 
the screen's "representation of the image" skillfully surveying the film's reception. She is, 
in different terms, actively interpreting the image and the audience's response to it. 
Because hooks employs a self-reflexive approach which emphasizes the personal as well 
as the political, we understand why the cover suggests that she, "comes to film not as a film 
critic but a cultural critic." Her analysis of film fills in the dots that allow readers to actually 
visualize cinematic reverberations and the dialectical relationship between mainstream 
and oppositional practices and contemplate the spaces and silences that many mainstream 
critics overlook. 
Highlighting a number of films which include but are not limited to Crooklyn, 
Exotica, Pulp Fiction, Kids, Hoop Dreams, Leaving Las Vegas, Waiting to Exhale, hooks 
168 
 amplifies the conventional feminist/womanist approach to film criticism offering bold 
critiques that challenge both the audience and cultural producers. In "Mock Feminism: 
Waiting to Exhale," for example, hooks problematizes the appropriation and marketing of 
black film. 
When a film that's basically about the trials and tribulations of four 
professional heterosexual black women who are willing to do any­
thing to get and keep a man is offered as a "feminist" narrative, it's 
truly a testament to the power of the mainstream to co-opt progressive 
social movements and strip them of all political meaning through a 
series of contemptuous ridiculous representations. (54) 
The interviews featured in the second half of the book further illustrate the emphasis 
on heterogeneity and multiplicity that is so readily apparent in hooks's essays. By 
interrogating the cultural producers themselves, she is able to substantiate her perspectives 
and provide readers with a glimpse at the vision from which cinematic representation 
emerges. In the words of Marie-France Alderman, "hooks goes about piercing 'the wall 
of denial' with some of the fiercest and sexiest film analyses ever published." With this 
text, we are once again reminded that hooks' s focus as a cultural critic is much larger than 
the isolated categories of race and gender. She tells us in the first page of her introduction 
that, "Movies make magic. They change things. They take the real and make it into 
something else right before our eyes." In Reel to Real hooks conjures a magic of her own 
in order to change things! 
University of Delaware Alvina E. Quintana 
YO' MAMA'S DISFUNKTIONAL: Fighting the Culture Wars in Urban America. By 
Robin D. G. Kelley. Boston: Beacon Press. 1997. 
With Yo' Mama's Disfunktional! cultural critic and social historian Robin D. G. 
Kelley weighs into the culture wars. Kelley's contribution is especially distinguished and 
welcomed because he locates black urban life and culture at the center of this spirited and 
thoughtful collection. Kelley tackles questions of gender, race, class, politics, social 
policy, ideology, academic discourse and ideology and in the process he demonstrates just 
how so much of the debates themselves and the assumptions that organize them depend 
on (mis) conceptions of black social and cultural life. Hence its provocative title. But the 
book's attention grabbing title is not simply a clever marketing ploy designed to get the 
attention of a popular audience. By using the vernacular language of black culture Kelley 
aims to focus our attention on the cynical and mean-spirited sentiment which characterizes 
so much of the culture wars. More importantly Kelley uses the title to illuminate the 
discursive operations, logical assumptions, and professional stakes involved in deriding 
and demeaning black people. As such the book attacks conservative and liberal discourses, 
logic, theories, and policies that position black folk as visible expression of the ill effects 
of the welfare state, identity politics (as if only blacks and people of color have identities) 
and aberrant cultural practices. 
With this deconstructive project, however, Kelley does not simply end up with a knee 
jerk defense of black culture and social life. For his sights are aimed as well at liberal and 
conservative discourses among blacks that are invested in myths of romantic nationalism, 
of boot-strap economic mobility, and individual moral superiority. Since white and black 
169 
 neo-conservatives make fairly easy pickings for him, the more significant contribution of 
the volume is the fact that Kelley trains his sights on the quieter and perhaps more insidious 
forms of attack on black life that comes from left conservatives and liberals. Here Kelley 
engages the legacy of enlightenment discourse in attacks on identity politics, the (racist) 
intellectual basis of policy attacks on the welfare state which go back thirty years, and a 
view of the superiority of western civilization which sees the cultural practices of 
contemporary black life as morally and aesthetically bankrupt. 
Kelley does more than deconstruct and defend here. In a series of quite marvelous and 
hopeful examples from black urban communities throughout the country, Kelley shows 
black people involved in multi-racial coalitions, labor movements, community organiza­
tions concerned with labor, environment, urban spaces and mass transportation, culture, 
race, sexuality, family and gender. 
Kelley has offered us a smart and engaging book that through its very example 
demonstrates the complexity of and importance of culture and politics for people on the 
ground here and now. Motivated by the real injuries inflicted upon black and poor people 
who are more often than not the objects of debates in the culture wars, Kelley has written 
a passionate book that shows why and how culture and politics matter in the lives of people. 
University of California-Santa Cruz Herman Gray 
SHAKESPEARE, THE MOVIE: Popularizing the Plays on Film, TV, and Video. Edited 
by Lynda E. Boose and Richard Burt. New York: Routledge. 1997. 
In the opening chapter of their collection of essays, Shakespeare, the Movie, editors 
Lynda E. Boose and Richard Burt offer an observation that might serve as a raison d'etre 
for this book: "All in all, the message from the mid-nineties would seem to be that 
Shakespeare was busting out all over" (15). Indeed, several popular Shakespearean films 
of the past decade receive extended treatment here-most notably Kenneth Branagh's 
Henry V, Franco Zeffirelli's Hamlet, and Richard Loncraine's Richard III. More surpris­
ing, however, little of the book is given over to recent films that one might expect to receive 
discussion in such a collection. For instance, Oliver Parker's Othello, Branagh's Hamlet 
and Much Ado about Nothing, and Baz Luhrmann' s Romeo and Juliet are discussed only 
in passing. Instead, the editors have included essays that examine a sweeping scope of 
films, beginning with the silent age—Gade and Schall's Hamlet (1920), starring Danish 
star Asta Nielsen as the first woman to play Hamlet on film—and continuing to "the age 
of post-mechanical reproduction"—Peter Greenaway's Prosperous Books. 
The editors describe the topics of the articles as including "a generic potlatch of what 
is presently available in filmic (usually video) format to the Shakespeare student or 
scholar" (1). The range here thus includes a wide variety of texts and critical approaches, 
a range which appeals to various audiences. Thus, for instance, while Tony Howard 
examines the historic 1953 made-for-television production of King Lear directed by Peter 
Brook and featuring Orson Welles as Lear, Laurie E. Osborne analyses the various kinds 
of animation techniques employed in Shakespeare: The Animated Tales and examines the 
way these techniques shape their respective texts. The range of texts and critical 
approaches is revealed even more fully in articles that focus on films which are Shakespearean 
spinoffs, articles such as Valeris Wayne's "Shakespeare Wallah and Colonial Specularity" 
and Richard Burt's "The Love That Dare Not Speak Shakespeare's Name: The New 
Shakesqueer Cinema." 
170 
 In part, non-Shakespearean films are included because the editors find that Shakespeare 
is often used in contemporary films as a touchstone for anti-intellectual humor: "The 
popularization of Shakespeare on film, video, and television—which began inside the 
stalwartly liberal tradition of noblesse oblige attempting to bring culture to the masses— 
now finds itself, in America at least, in a strictly market-responsive milieu in which 
noblesse oblige attempting to bring culture to the masses—now finds itself, in America at 
least, in a strictly market-responsive milieu in which literary knowledge is in general a 
decidedly low capital, frequently mockable commodity, caught within the peculiarly 
American ambivalence about intellectualism, and therefore to be eschewed at all costs" 
(12). This explanation accounts for the attention given to films such as Clueless and The 
Last Action Hero, which uses disparaging references to Shakespeare simply as markers of 
hipness in contemporary youth culture. More interesting, however, are the articles about 
My Private Idaho and Bugsy that examine how these two films include rich subtexts which 
incorporate the Henry TV plays {Idaho) and Antony and Cleopatra (Bugsy). While not all 
Shakespeare scholars and students will find the entire collection to their taste, the breadth 
and inclusiveness of the collection should interest many. 
University of California-Davis Eric James Schroeder 
DANGEROUS KNOWLEDGE: The JFK Assassination in Art and Film. By Art Simon. 
Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 1996. 
Instigated by the recognition of repetition and strategies of appropriation in Bruce 
Conner's film, Report, Simon's analysis of artistic images inspired by the JFK assassina­
tion articulates the "varying interpretations of contradictory conclusions" endemic to the 
visual evidence of the assassination and extends its quality of "shifting illegibility" to art 
and film. Simon's study, divided into three sections, explores how the assassination 
debates "became the focal point for a protracted struggle over camera vision and historical 
authorship and how the images and issues stemming from the case have been inscribed in 
art and film over the last thirty years." After tracing the assassination's literary history in 
mainstream and marginal presses, Simon embarks on the various interpretations and 
manipulations of visible historical artifacts, including the Zapruder film, the slain 
president's body, and the images and documents providing various interpretations of 
Oswald's identity. Noting that the assassination exists as a "controversy with images at its 
core," Simon continues by applying the aspect of varying interpretations to the art and film 
world's appropriations of historical images and incorporating them in the arena of ongoing 
assassination debates. In the second section, Simon focuses on pop art's portrayal of JFK 
as media image and the art's employment of the very modes it critiques, such as repetition 
and the inundation of images, both characteristics central to the Warhol silkscreens, camp 
paraphernalia, and alternative cinema, including Bruce Conner's Report, Ant Farm / T. R. 
Uthco's The Eternal Frame, and Gary Kibbons' The Long Take. Section three, devoted to 
feature filmic portrayals of the assassination, includes analyses of The Parallex View 
( 1974), Winter Kills ( 1978), and Blow Out (1981), with emphasis and extended explication 
applied to Executive Action (1974) and JFK (1991). Simon's final chapter is dedicated 
solely to Oliver Stone's controversial film, JFK, in which Stone combined a collage of 
conspiracies within the persona of the lone investigator, former New Orleans District 
Attorney, Jim Garrison, and created a heavily criticized montage of history derived from 
the juxtaposition of documentary and fiction. Simon appropriately labels Stone's film as 
171 
 both a summation of three decades of assassination debates, inquiries, and theories, as well 
as a continuation of those debates through the film's reification of existing theories and the 
introduction of a new generation to assassination anxiety propelled by epistemological 
concern. For each work, Simon establishes a necessary context for the visual text to be 
analyzed, whether it be placing Andy Warhol's Jackie silkscreens amidst the environment 
of Warhol's different social location and consistent treatment of celebrity and death, or the 
placement of the assassination films within the context of a seventies cinema that 
concentrated on conspiracy, pathos, and paranoia. Simon carefully punctuates his discus­
sions by drawing from a disparate collection of theorists, referencing the ideology of such 
individuals as Roland Barthes, Michel Foucault, Andre Bazin, Gertrude Stein, Sigmund 
Freud, Linda Williams, and Pier Paolo Pasolini. Simon's employment of both cultural and 
film theory provides enlightening exploration into a seminal, yet elusive moment in history 
and into a culture that continues to provide revisions of that history through the appropria­
tion of "unintelligible" and "illegible" images. Simon's text provides an event-focused 
study for those interested in the relationship between art and history, as well as an 
introduction for readers not aware of discrepancies plaguing the JFK case and the cultural 
contribution to its historiographie discourse. JFK buffs will find a succinct and unbiased 
compilation of the assassination's various studies and contradictory evidence in the first 
section, while students and scholars of art and film will appreciate the attention to theory, 
form, and content included in Simon's contextual interpretations of a variety of creative 
works. 
Texas Tech University Jill Talbot 
NEW PIONEERS: The Back-to-the-Land Movement and the Search for a Sustainable 
Future. By Jeffery Jacob. University Park: The Pennsylvania State University Press. 1997. 
Jeffrey Jacob's work is a timely and much needed exploration of a small but persistent 
part of American society, namely new pioneers, also referred to as back-to-the-landers and 
neo-homesteaders. In Jacob's nuanced and thoughtful exploration, he raises two important 
questions. First, can this rather disparate set of individuals be called a movement? Second, 
can this movement become a political force? In attempting to answer these questions, 
Jacob sets himself a daunting task. 
Though there are no useful data on the population of new pioneers in the United 
States, Jacob develops a useful characterization of seven sub-categories: weekenders, 
pensioners, country romantics, country entrepreneurs, purists, micro-farms and appren­
tices. Having established the seven ways of living back-to-the-land, Jacob takes a chapter 
each to explore a) neo-homesteader values (self-reliance and the desire to live simply), b) 
attitudes to soft technology (ecologically sound, renewable sustainable, non-specialized, 
and labor intensive), and c) how urban pioneers function. He then explores the possibility 
of new pioneer activism and concludes by speculating on the role of new pioneers in a 
sustainable future. One of the most thoughtful aspects of this book is the manner in which 
Jacob lays out the tension between neo-homesteaders' dreams, and the lack of resources 
and time to invest in fulfilling them. Indeed he concludes that though many only manage 
a semi-subsistence life, it is the adherence to the philosophy and spirituality of new 
pioneerism that sustains neo-homesteaders. 
Where Jacob's work is at its weakest is in its questionnaire design and sampling, 
leading to a narrow and ahistorical analysis. This weakness makes itself plain in three 
areas. First, Jacob began his study with exploratory interviews and questionnaires in both 
172 
 western Canada and the U.S. in 1983. Using these data he develops a questionnaire that 
is applied in the early 1990s to a U.S. population. This reader saw problems in a) mixing 
both Canadian and U.S. data, and b) the ten-year time lag between the development and 
the application of the questionnaire. This time lag was made more apparent by Jacob's own 
description of the historical shifts in the "back-to-the-land" movement during this period. 
Second, the sampling of the back-to-the lander population is problematic. Mention­
ing that he has been asked if he had come into contact with any right-wing groups, Jacob 
stated he had not. He then briefly sketches his sense of back-to-the-landers: "I believe it 
will become evident that they are a generally progressive, well-educated group." This bias 
is amplified in the way Jacob identified his population sample. This reader would suggest 
that using the mailing lists of Countryside, which Jacob characterized as a pragmatic 
Mother Earth, is likely to have precluded a more radically conservative homesteading 
readership. 
Finally, there was no descriptive overview of Jacob's sample in terms of race, class, 
ethnicity, gender, and marital/cohabiting/communal status. For example, this reader 
wondered if Jacob's respondents were primarily white. Jacob's discussion of the gendered 
disparity of homesteader work cried out for a more rigorous analysis as one of Jacob's 
respondents makes plain: "Please send an additional questionnaire to my husband—you 
would be amazed at the differences." 
This book points to an important but neglected area of study. The sympathetic manner 
Jacob takes to his subject does indeed give a thoughtful sense of neo-homesteaders life, 
which this reader appreciated. However, the various methodological problems outlined 
gave no useful sense of who neo-homesteaders are, and thus this reader is not convinced, 
by this text, that this group is a movement or that it has activist possibilities. 
University of Missouri-Kansas City Amanda Rees 
THE NEW AGE MOVEMENT IN AMERICAN CULTURE. By Richard Kyle. Lanham, 
Maryland: University Press of America. 1995. 
The so-called New Age Movement has spawned many books, but few offer as helpful 
an overview of the phenomenon as this one. Kyle provides a workmanlike survey of the 
New Age's antecedents reaching as far back as Hellenistic gnosticism and hermeticism, 
and spotlights in diverse manifestations in contemporary American religion, philosophy, 
science, education, psychology, healing, politics, and "the occult." As Kyle acknowl­
edges, the New Age is not easy to define precisely. What he emphasizes is the anti-modern 
(i.e. anti the world of the Age of Reason and the rationalistic science, social science, and 
social organization it set in motion) character of what is collectively called the New Age. 
This perspective, of course, puts it in the same bed with what is more academically called 
postmodernism. But this critical and credulous stance becomes New Age when it self­
consciously manifests in popular culture and, on a more intellectual or spiritual level, is 
founded on a quasi-religious view of the universe as monistic, impersonal, and dynamic. 
The dynamic universe view includes concepts of reincarnation and higher intelligences, 
and presents a cosmos replete with the "correspondences" and "energies" that make for 
astrology and healing. 
When features like these appear, even implicitly, behind religious, psychological, 
political, or other vogues, one detects another sign that the New Age is dawning. Kyle also 
stresses New Age individualism and subjectivism: The "I'm spiritual but not religious" 
173 
 and "It's true for me if I believe it's true" mentalities. While it cannot be said that this work 
holds the scholarly depth of Wouter Hanegraaf s monumental New Age Religion and 
Western Culture (Leiden, 1996), in my view it actually has a clearer focus on the American 
cultural setting of the New Age here. Beyond this, his historical and typological paradigms 
help to bring some order to an exceptionally diffuse social movement. 
As Kyle recognizes, the heyday of the New Age movement under that name and with 
its Shirley McLaine appurtenances of crystals, astrology, channeling, neo-shamanism, 
and belief in reincarnation was probably the 1970s and 1980s, when it represented 
something of a routinization and interiorization of the sixties counterculture. By the last 
decade of the century it seemed to be fading a bit. But the study of the New Age movement 
is important nonetheless and not only for historical reasons; if, as Harold Bloom has 
declared, American religion is fundamentally gnostic in character, movements directly 
related to gnosticism's Hellenistic, hermetic parentage are likely to keep on emerging 
alongside the crypto-gnosticism of American-style Christianity. Where once there was 
Mesmerism, S wedenborgianism, Spiritualism, Theosophy, New Thought, the countercul­
ture and then the New Age, some new secret saving wisdom will doubtless arrive in the 
new millennium, perhaps a form of the cybermysticism heralded in Erik Davis' Techgnosis 
(New York, 1998). 
Kyle does not conceal his own evangelical Christian position, and sometimes uses 
other evangelical writers as sources together with numerous New Age authors themselves. 
But he is eminently fair-minded, and never allows his own creed to intrude on a balanced 
presentation of the material. At the end of the book, he offers a Christian critique of the New 
Age, which is his privilege. 
Serious students of the New Age movement will not want to overlook the resources 
this modest-appearing book has to offer. Kyle has done his homework, and his fifty-six 
pages of notes will themselves be invaluable to future researchers. 
Auburn University Robert Ellwood 
174 
 Acknowledgements 
We extend our appreciation to scholars who have recently reviewed manuscripts for 
American Studies. 
William Barillas, Rutgers University; Warren Belasco, University of Maryland; Gai 
Berlage, Iona College; Greg Black, University of Missouri, Kansas City; James D. Bloom, 
Muhlenberg College; John Bloom, Dickinson College; Keith Byerman, Indiana State 
University; Paul Ceruzzi, National Air and Space Museum; David Courtwright, Univer­
sity of North Florida; Thomas Cripps, Morgan State University; David Farber, University 
of New Mexico; Stephen Fox, Somerville, Massachusetts; Steven Frye, Antelope Valley 
College; Sam Girgus, Vanderbilt University; Benjamin Goluboff, Lake Forest College; 
Kirsten Gruesz, Oakes College; Joseph Harrington, University of Kansas; Stephen 
Hartnett, University of California, Berkeley; J. David Hoeveler, University of Wisconsin; 
Paul E. Johnson, University of Utah; Michael Kimmel, SUNY, Stony Brook; Wilma King, 
Michigan State University; Sherry Linkon, Youngstown State University; George Lipsitz, 
University of California, San Diego; Jeff Loeb, Pembroke Hill School; Debra MacComb, 
State University of West Georgia; Alan Marcus, Iowa State University; Ted McAllister, 
Hillsdale College; Stephen Mintz, University of Houston; Robyn Muncy, University of 
Maryland; Kathy Newman, Carnegie Mellon; Vera Norwood, University of New Mexico; 
Max Page, Georgia State University; Sandra Patton, University of Minnesota; Janice Peck, 
University of Colorado; Joel Schwartz, Montclair State University; David N. Smith, 
University of Kansas; Dikran Tashjian, University of California, Irvine; Jules Tygiel, San 
Francisco State University; David Van Leer, University of California, Davis; Thomas 
Volek, University of Kansas; William Wagnon, Washburn University; Dana White, 
Emory University. 
Finally, we wish to thank Pam LeRow and Linda Weeks for their superb work in 
facilitating the production of American Studies. 
175 
