Report of the Massachusetts Task 
- 
Force on Organ Transplantation 
S E C T I O N  I:  
INTRODUCTION AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Task Force on Organ Transplan- 
tation was announced on September 
26, 1983 by the Secretary of Human 
Services and the Commissioner of 
Public Health, and charged wirh “the 
development of standards and proc- 
esses for evaluating the use of organ 
transplantation” in Massachusetts. I t  
was asked to 
make recommendations con- 
cerning how organ transplanta- 
tion should he introduced and 
financed, including mecha- 
nisms to assure equality of ac- 
cess; 
determine what priority should 
be placed by the state on ex- 
The Report of the Massachusetts Task 
Force oii Orgari Traitsplairfatioiz was 
preseiited to the Commtssiorrer of 
Public Health aiid to the Secretary of 
Human Sendces of the Commopi- 
i ivulrh of .Cfassacbirsetls oii October 
18, 1984. hrrr  of the sei~eii sectioiis of 
the Report are repriiited here: 
I .  liitrodiictioii aiid 
If The State of I I w  Art p. 12 
I\’ Patwiit Selectiori 
Kecoririire~idatiotis p. X 
aiirl Katioiiiiig 
Schemes p. I* 
VII. Reim bu rseni en t Poli- 
cies for Orgair 
Trarrsplantatioii p. 21 
Footiiotes haiv heen reirirmbc,red 
aiid placed in the Itsttal style for  Law, 
Mcclicine eC Health Care. 
C h p l c t c ~  copies of the Report may 
he ohtaiirecl from the Departmeiit of 
I’uhlic Health, Conimoriwealfb of 
.~lassachirsrtts. 150 Tremont St.,  Ros- 
toll, MA 02111-~617)727-7023. 
A listiirg of the members of the .*las- 
.~achrsetts Task Force on Organ 
Tratisplarrtatiorz appears on page I6 
8 Lau! Medicirre 6 HraNb Care 
treme and expensive medical 
interventions; 
0 determine what criteria should 
be used in patient selection; 
and 
determine how and by whom 
decisions concerning t r a m  
plantation availability and pa- 
tient selection criteria should 
be made. 
The seventeen member Task Force 
is composed of citizens with personal 
or professional interest and expertise 
in organ transplantation including 
public officials, health care providers, 
representatives of major religious 
groups, insurance company officials, 
business leaders, and faculty mem- 
bers of local schools of public health. 
The Task Force held its first meeting 
in September, 1983 and has held fif- 
teen meetings, including a public 
hearing, over a twelve month period. 
All meetings were open to the public, 
and there were no executive sessions. 
This Report sets forth the final recorn- 
mendations of the Task Force as well 
as a summary of the reasoning and 
facts on which these recommenda- 
tions are based. Preliminary recom- 
mendations were announced by the 
Task Force in early January, 1984. and 
these final recommendations clarify 
them, and add a section on the “con- 
sortium approach.” 
The Task Force has been well 
aware throughout its deliberations 
that its role in the public policy de- 
bate about organ transplantation is 
very circumscribed. The introduction 
of new medical technologies in the 
United States tends to take on a life of 
its own, and the impact of govern- 
ment policy on its diffusion has been 
very limited. Nevertheless, experi- 
ence with kidney dialysis and trans- 
plantation has taught us that failure to 
plan can lead to tremendous unantici- 
pated public expenditures and re- 
source allocation problems. The Task 
Force has reviewed the kidney trans- 
plant history for the lessons it holds 
for the two procedures the Task Force 
decided to concentrate on: liver and 
heart transplantation. These are not 
only the ones currently clamoring for 
wider introduction into the system, 
but also provide useful policy models 
for decisions regarding other extreme 
and expensive procedures. 
During the year the Task Force has 
worked, the transplant environment 
has continued to evolve. There was a 
series of congressional hearings co~i- 
centrating on organ procurement, 
sales, and federal financing, and the 
National Organ Transplant Act made 
its way through Congress. The Sur- 
geon General continued his initiative 
to involve the private sector in organ 
procurement. In Massachusetts, four 
hospitals were granted certificates of 
need to d o  liver transplants under a 
“consortium“ arrangement and, based 
in pan on the recommendation of this 
Task Force, a single hospital was 
given a temporary exemption from 
DON to d o  cardiac transplantation. 
Massachusetts Blue CrossjBlue Shield 
initiated a “Transplant Insurance Pro- 
gram” (TIP) for its group subscribers, 
and in early 1984 decided to include 
organ transplants as part of its basic 
coverage. Massachusetts Medicaid 
also pledged to cover necessary heart 
and liver transplants. A statute was en- 
acted in Massachusetts i n  late Decrm- 
ber 1983 to set up a separate fund, 
financed by donations and contribu- 
tions made from state income tax re- 
funds, to help pay for organ trans- 
plants for those unable to finance 
them themselves. This ’checkoff“ sys- 
tem will begin in 1985. 
Why all this interest in organ trans- 
plantation, and why a Task Force to 
examine ”the difficult ethical and f i -  
nancial decisions” involved! There is 
no single reason, but the following 
combination of factors together ap- 
pears to account for the current focus 
on liver and heart transplantation: 
0 those needing them are easily 
identified. need them quickly 
 to survive, and have often been 
able to get their plight highly 
publicized; 
0 transplants are viewed by the 
public as life-saving; 
0 the transplant procedure is ex- 
tremely expensive, so that its 
general provision may have a 
significant impact on the 
health care system, and this is 
the first time rationing such a 
procedure has been seriously 
discussed by public officials; 
and 
0 denial of a transplant on the 
basis of inability to pay seems 
to unfairly restrict the proce- 
dure to the wealthy, and seems 
to place a specific price on life. 
The issue has also taken on special 
importance in Masschusetts for at 
least four reasons: (1) Massachusetts 
has been blessed with some of the 
most outstanding hospitals and medi- 
cal schools in the country and has al- 
ways been seen as a major medical 
research center; (2)  the first kidney 
transplant and the second series of 
liver transplants were done in Massa- 
chusetts; ( 3 )  the Trustees of the Mas- 
sachusetts General Hospital explicitly 
decided nor to engage in heart trans- 
plant surgery in 1980 because of the 
tremendous cost of a program which 
would benefit only a few patients 
(this unique step by a major hospital 
was nor rescinded until 1984); and 
(4) Massachusetts is the home of Ja- 
mie Fiske, who received a liver trans- 
plant in Minnesota in October, 1982, 
and whose father, Charles Fiske, has 
done more than any single person to 
publicize the inadequacies of the 
present system of financing and ob- 
taining a liver transplant. 
Nonetheless, although the Task 
Force was asked to prepare a set of 
recommendations in a four month 
time period, the Task Force did not 
view this as a major policy emergency 
from the point of view of Massachu- 
setts citizens as a whole. In 1983, for 
example, only 5 (4 liver and 1 heart) 
Massachusetts citizens had to leave 
the state to seek non-kidney organ 
transplantation; and only 8 proce- 
dures were done within the state. The 
individuals involved could, of course, 
have been better served if public pol- 
icy had been in place. But in such a 
new, expensive, complicated, and 
rapidly evolving field about which lit- 
tle is known concerning the need, 
outcome, quality control require- 
ments, or COSI of procedures, these 
problems are inevitable. The Task 
Force decided it  was prudent to ex- 
amine them critically and carefully 
rather than rushing to conclusions 
that might, in the long run, cause 
more suffering and problems than 
they prevent. 
On the federal level, the almost ex- 
clusive concern is increasing the sup- 
ply to transplantable organs by mak- 
ing the organ procurement system 
more efficient. In Massachusetts and 
New England, organ procurement 
problems are real, but this has not 
been the primary factor limiting use 
of this technology, and witnesses be- 
fore the Task Force indicated that ix is 
not likely to be the major issue in the 
foreseeable future for o u r  region. Ac- 
cordingly, exclusive concentration on  
organ procurement is at least prema- 
ture. The reason for this region's posi. 
tion in organ procurement is the suc- 
cess of the New England Organ Bank, 
and its work deserves wider public at- 
tention and support. 
The major public policy issue in or- 
gan transplantation is how to move to- 
ward three goals simultaneously: 
quality of services, equality of access 
to services, and cost containment. 
Even assuming that we can maintain 
the high quality of care offered to 
Massachusetts citizens, will it be  pos- 
sible to simultaneously increase cq- 
uity of access to services, and de-  
crease or limit its cost? Assuming a 
limit on  total health care and medical 
expenditures, some trade-offs must be 
made. In a country in which organs 
for transplant are routinely sought 
from other states, and in which citi- 
zens may freely travel to seek medical 
assistance, a national approach to or- 
gan transplants is both desirable and 
necessary. No individual state can de-  
velop an effective organ transplant 
program without utilizing a multistate 
organ procurement network. Nor can 
any state act as an organ transplant 
center wirhout reasonable reimburse 
ment policies in place in the states 
from which it draws its patients. 
Nonetheless, in the absence of any 
federal leadership in the area of organ 
transplantation. it would be equally ir- 
responsible for the individual states 
to d o  nothing. Even though we can- 
not d o  as well as we would like, we 
should d o  as well as we can 
Ultimately, of course. one would 
like to eliminate the need for organ 
transplantation. I t  is a powerful and 
often life-saving technique, but while 
it  may circumvent the patients' under- 
lying illness by replacing a diseased 
organ with a non-diseased organ, it 
gives the patient a new life-long prob- 
lem: coping with immunosuppression 
to prevent organ rejection. The Task 
Force's mandate did not include mak- 
ing recommendations on h3sic sci- 
ence research or the comparative 
value of preventive programs (includ- 
ing public healrh programs to encour- 
age exercise and reduce weight, 
smoking and alcohol consumption). 
Nonetheless, the Task Force believes 
that efforts in both basic science re- 
search and preventive approaches 
should be vigorously encouraged as 
the long term approach to major or- 
gan failure. 
We are under no  illusions that 
these recommendations are the "final 
word." Our hope is that this is a help- 
ful report and that other states and 
those working toward a coherent na- 
tional policy will find i t  constructive. 
Findings and Recommendat ions 
The Task Force finds that the primary 
values at stake in organ transplanta- 
tion are human life, equity. and fair- 
ness. Organ transplants are extremely 
expensive; the fully-allocated average- 
one-year-cost is $230-340.000 for 
liver transplants and $170-200,000 for 
heart transplants. This is in the range 
of 4-10 times the cost of the other 
most expensive currently-employed 
medical technologies. Nonetheless, 
the Task Force believes that these 
procedures should be performed on  
those who are likely to benefit from 
them, so long as the total cost is con- 
trolled, and resources are not diverted 
from higher priority medical proce- 
dures to liver and heart transplanta- 
tion. The question of what a "higher 
priority" procedure is will b e  based 
February 1985 9 
 on the total number of individuals af- 
fected, and the importance to their 
lives of the intervention. For example, 
it may be appropriate to shut down 
an underutilized maternity program to 
do organ transplants. The burden of 
demonstrating that such a trade-off is 
appropriate, however, should be on 
the hospital proposing it. Accord- 
ingly, in the determination of need 
(DON) process, all currently available 
health care services should be pre- 
sumed to be higher priority than 
transplantation, The applicant should 
have the burden of demonstrating that 
transplantation has a higher priority 
than any other currently available 
health care service from which organ 
transplantation diverts funds and/or 
support systems. 
On the issues of equity and fair- 
ness, we concur with the conclusions 
of the President's Commission for the 
Study of Ethical Problems in Medi- 
cine and Biomedical and Behavioral 
Research: society has an ethical obli- 
gation to ensure equitable access to 
health care for all; and the cost of 
achieving equitable access to health 
care ought to be shared fairly.' Trans- 
plantation o f  livers and hearts should 
therefore only he permitted if access 
to this technology can he made inde- 
pendent of the  inclividual's ability to 
pay for i t ,  and if transplantation itself 
does not adversely affect the provi- 
sion o f  other higher priority health 
c a r r  service5 t o  the public. We be- 
lieve it  is posdhle to achieve this goal 
only by tlir graclual introduction of 
this technology i n  the Common- 
wralth, 3 claw and careful nionitor- 
ing of quality care. costs. outcomes, 
and patient selection, and provided 
that liver and heart transplantation 
can be done i n  the Commonwealth in 
a manner that does not necessitate ad- 
ditional capital expenditures for this 
purpose. The existence o f  Ch. 372, 
the DON procedure, and rate setting 
give us some confidence that this is 
possible. 
Recommendation 1 
Liver and hrart transphtation should 
be introduced into the Conimon- 
wealth in a controlled, phased niaii- 
ner that provides the opportunity for 
effective evaluation and review of its 
clinical, social, and economic aspects 
by a publicly-accountable body after 
an initial phase of 2-3 years of limited 
transplantation. 
Discussion; The Task Force's basic 
conclusion is that heart and liver 
transplantation should be introduced 
into the Commonwealth of Massachu- 
setts, but that the introduction should 
be done in a deliberate and cautious 
manner through a carefully moni- 
tored, phased approach. The findings 
and recommendations of the Task 
Force concentrate primarily on "Phase 
I," which may be termed the phase of 
"Initial Social Assessment." During 
this phase a limited number of heart 
and liver transplants should be per- 
formed in an atmosphere that maxi- 
mizes the potential for clinical, eco- 
nomic and social data gathering. The 
anticipation is that sufficient data will 
be gathered during this 2-3 year 
phase to provide the basis for a deci- 
sion by the Public Health Council and 
other publicly-accountable bodies to 
determine the direction and scale of 
the next phase. 
Recommendation 2 
The decision of when extreme and 
expensive medical technologies, like 
heart and liver transplantation, should 
be generally available should be 
made only after the clinical, social, 
and economic consequences of intro- 
ducing the procedure, including cost- 
effectiveness, ethical implications, 
and long term effects on society, are 
studied and reviewed by a publiclv- 
accountable body. 
Discussion: Tests currently used to 
determine when a new procedure 
should be generally available, like ex- 
perimental vs. therapeutic or prether- 
apeutic, or "safe and effective," tend 
to concentrate the discussion on the 
technical aspects of a new procedure 
without consideration of its impact on 
society in terms of values, financing, 
skewing the system, or allocating re- 
sources. Whatever the appropriate- 
ness of such tests in the past, these 
technical-assessment-based tests can. 
not serve as a reasonable or useful 
threshold test for the general intro- 
duction of extreme and expensive 
procedures in an era of resource con- 
straint. Bodies like the Task Force can 
act as appropriate forums for examin- 
ing the "social consequences" in- 
volved in introducing new medical 
technologies into the system, and 
making recommendations to publicly 
accountable agencies like the Public 
Health Council. 
extreme and expensive procedures 
should be generally reimbursed 
should be made in such a way that 
Medicaid does not become the de 
fact0 insurer for all such procedures. 
One possible mechanism would be a 
joint committee with representation 
from the state and the insurance com- 
panies, with input by external evalua- 
tion groups like the Task Force and 
federal agencies like the Office of 
Technology Assessment. Using this or 
some other analogous mechanism 
could help ensure fairness in the dis- 
tribution of burdens regarding reim- 
bursement. 
Recommendation 3 
In making a decision regarding an ap- 
plication for a determination of need 
(DON) for heart and liver transplanta- 
tion, the Public Health Council 
should attempt to minimize and track 
the total incremental cost of adding 
these procedures to the health care 
system. 
Discussion: Although the Task 
Force endorses the limited and con- 
trolled introduction of organ trans- 
plantation in Massachusetts, ir  does so 
only because it believes that it can be 
done without decreasing services in 
other medical sectors, and that the t o -  
tal demand can be met without addi~ 
tional capital expenditures. Whether 
or not this assumption is correct, of 
course, remains to be seen. Testing 
this view will require careful monitor- 
ing of the impact of organ transplanta- 
tion performed at major university fa- 
cilities on such things as ICU utiliza- 
tion in community hospitals, as well 
as on the general case mixes in the 
hospitals. While it might optimisti- 
cally be hoped that both heart and 
liver transplantation can be intro- 
duced in Massachusetts without capi- 
tal expansion by increased efficiency 
and "taking up the slack in the sys. 
tem." it is uncertain what the "spill 
over" effects will be and how many 
The decision of whether particular, 
 (if any) more similar technologies 
can b e  "painlessly" introduced in the 
future. As a principle, the Task Force 
believes that if it turns out that liver 
and heart transplantations take re- 
sources away from higher priority 
health care services, and decrease 
their accessibility to the public, these 
transplantation procedures should not 
b e  performed. 
To help evaluate the effects of or- 
gan transplantation on the system, 3s 
well as its cost and quality control 
mechanisms. and monitor Phase I ,  the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
should contract with an independent 
evaluation group with medical :ind 
economic experrise to collect and 
analyze data on liver and heart trans. 
plantations during Phase 1. 
for, costs of, and outcomes of Liver 
and heart transplantation is insuffi- 
cient to justify any more than the v e y  
limited and controlled introduction of 
these technologies in Massachusetts. 
For example. the "additional evidence 
about the effectiveness and safety" of 
liver transplants anticipated by the 
Fineberg Repon has not yet niaterial- 
ized. .An independent evaluation 
group could collect and 3tYalyLe com- 
prehensive data during Phase I ,  and 
present it to the Public Hcalth Coun- 
cil in a credible manner. 3s an essei1- 
ti31 aid in their decision making proc- 
ess. 
Recommendation 4 
Until such time as there are reasona. 
bly reliable data on the need for, 
costs of, and outcomes of liver and 
heart transplantation (end of Phase 1) 
hospitals proposing to d o  these pro- 
cedures in the Commonwealth shoulcl 
not be given 3 certificate of need un- 
less they agree to (1) support the op- 
erating expenses for heart and liver 
transplantation within current reim- 
bursement limits set by the hospital's 
maximum allowable cost under Chap- 
ter 372 of the Acts of 1982 (provided 
that an exception may be granted for 
expenditures that are unique to organ 
transplantation: the cost of the organ 
itself and the cost of the Cyclosporin 
A); (2) collect evaluative data on the 
costs. outcomes, and displacements 
caused by transplant candidates who 
Current i,nformation about the need 
receive transplants as well as those 
who d o  nor, in 3 manner approved by 
the Department of Public Health. and 
agree to make this data available to 
the Department and an independent 
evaluation group; and (3)  have the 
protocols reviewed. approved and 
monitored by the Institutional Review 
Board (IRB),  or by 3 special review 
board set up for this purpose by the 
Department of Public Health. 
Heart and liver transplanta- 
tion should be introduced 
into the Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts, but the intro- 
duction should be done in a 
deliberate and cautious man- 
ner through a carefully moni- 
tored, phased approach. 
Discussiotr; Implicit in this recom- 
mendation is the Task Force's view 
that the determination of need proc- 
ess is an appropriate one for required 
review and prior approval of this ex- 
treme and expensive technology be- 
cause of the major impact it is likely 
to have on the health cxe system. 
The requirement of working under 
the "MAC" or maximum allowable 
costs echoes the Fineberg Task Force 
recornmendation which it believed 
should hold until "the representative 
advisory body [this Task Force] has 
rendered a judgment about adding 
costs to the health care system for 
such ex reme  and expensive proce- 
dures."' As previously noted, the fac- 
tual data upon which such 3 judgment 
can be rendered are not yet available. 
Finally, subparts (2) and (3) of this 
recommendation recognize the need 
to collect data in a systematic and 
complete manner, and recognize that 
whether it is characterized as experi- 
mental, pre-therapeutic, theripeutic 
or by some other designation. both 
heart and liver transplants require and 
demand significant research and data 
collection activities that make IRB re- 
view or analogous protocol review by 
a similarly-constituted body both war- 
ranted and useful. Special attention in 
this review should be focused on the 
consent procedure utilized by the in- 
stitution, procedures used to with- 
draw consent and order the withhold- 
ing of future treatment (if and when 
the patient determines he or she does 
not want further treatment, even if 
such 3 decision will result in death), 
organ procurement procedures, pa- 
tient selection procedures. and issues 
of confidentiality. 
Recommendation 5 
Patient selection criteria should he 
public, fair, and equitable. Primary 
screening should he based on medi- 
cal suitability criteria made available 
to the public which are designed to 
offer transplantation to those who can 
henefit the most from it in terms of 
probability of living for a significant 
period of time with 3 reasonable pros. 
pect for rehabilitation. I f  there are in- 
sufficient resources to transplant all 
who can so benefit, selection from 
the medically-suitahle group should 
he based primarily o n  a first-come, 
first-served basis. The selection crite- 
ria and process should he filed with 3 
publicly-accountable body. 
Discusion: Fairness and equity de-  
mand that no  one be excluded from 
the pool of potential recipients be- 
cause of social class, ability to pay, 
family situation, or place of residence 
in New England. Referral patterns 
need t o  he  examined. but allc.alldi- 
dates who are referred for tranq~lant 
should undergo the vame medical 
screening examination. In this screen. 
ing examination, age can he taken 
into account as o m  factor (insofar 2s 
it may affect longevity and prospects 
for rehabilitation), hut cannot he used 
alone as an arbitrary disqualification. 
Likewise, the policy should recognize 
that Massachusetts has a special, his- 
torical relationship to our neighhor- 
ing states, and that residents of the 
New England states that have been in- 
volved with the New England Organ 
Bank's program should be eligihle for 
transplants on  the same basis as Mas- 
sachusetts citizens. Their state of resi- 
dence should adopt mechanisms to 
reimburse Massachusetts hospitals for 
their transplants. 
For liver transplants especially, ac- 
tive alcoholism may be taken into ac- 
count insofar as it might affect the 
longevity and prospects for functional 
rehabilitation, hut not as an absolute 
 contraindication. As the President's 
Commission has properly noted: 
"In light of the special importance of 
health care, the largely undeserved 
character of differences in health sta- 
tus, and the uneven distribution and 
unpredictability of health care needs, 
society has a moral obligation to en- 
sure adequate care for all."' 
Similarly, although family support 
networks may be extremely important 
in after-hospital care, the absence of a 
family or the existence of an uncon- 
ventional substitute should not serve 
as a reason to exclude the patient 
from evaluation. Society should de- 
velop mechanisms, in cooperation 
with the transplanting hospitals, to 
provide sufficient support resources 
for such patients during their recuper- 
ation. The cost of after-care, including 
visiting nurses or other needed medi- 
cal support for a transplant candidate 
without a family or other social sup- 
port, should be included in the analy- 
sis of the cost of the transplant proce- 
dure itself. Hospitals should develop 
plans for dealing with such patients, 
and these plans should be included in 
their DON applications. 
Patient selection criteria 
should be public, fair, and eq- 
uitable. 
I f  the pool of medically-acceptable 
candidates is larger than available re- 
sources, patient selection should be 
made on a first-come, first-served ba- 
sis with consideration of the donor 
organ "match." This is expected to be 
close to a random 3llocation, and is 
probably the fairest we can do  at this 
lime Individual adjustments in the 
system may be called for in a medical 
emergency, or where some on the 
waiting list are from outside New 
England. New England residents can 
be given preference so long as this 
policy is made known to non-New 
England residents before they are 
medically evaluated for transplant; 
and during Phase I ,  non-New England 
residents should not be screened un- 
less they have demonstrated the abil- 
ity to finance their transplants. 
In the event that an individual be- 
lieves he o r  she has been discrimi- 
nated against unfairly in the selection 
process, the hospital should have an 
appeals mechanism in place to enable 
the individual to present his case 
promptly and fairly to a neutral deci- 
sion-maker with authority to have the 
patient's case reviewed again by the 
selection team. 
Recommendation 6 
If more than one hospital is granted a 
certificate of need to do heart or liver 
transplantation, all hospitals so in- 
volved should be required to coordi- 
nate services in a way that comes as 
close as possible to a single, inte- 
grated medical service. Each hospital 
should be able independently to 
demonstrate either its ability to per- 
form the procedure, or to act in con- 
cert with the other hospitals in a par- 
ticular aspect of the procedure. All 
hospitals should establish and use a 
single set of patient selection and 
treatment protocols, agree to joint 
publication of research results, use a 
common patient recipient pool and a 
common organ procurement pool, 
formalize a program for the inter- 
change and common use of staff and 
students, develop a common training 
program, share facilities and equip- 
ment, use a common format for data 
collection, and establish a formal or- 
ganization, central staff, and records 
file. 
to inaugurate extreme and expensive 
medical technologies like heart and 
liver transplantation either at a single 
facility or at a "consortium" that meets 
the criteria set forth in this Report. 
This is consistent with recommenda- 
tion 1, that liver and heart transplanta- 
tion be introduced into the Common- 
wealth in a "controlled, phased man- 
ner." Looked at purely from an eco- 
nomic point of view, one cannot 
make out  a case for initiating organ 
transplantation at more than one hos- 
pital. Nonetheless, truly cooperative 
efforts have some other potential ad- 
vantages. In the case of liver trans- 
plantation, the Public Health Council 
has already granted certificates of 
need to four individual hospitals who 
have agreed in principle to work to- 
gether. On the other hand, an exemp- 
tion from DON for heart transplanta- 
Discussion: In general it seems best 
tion has been granted to a single hos- 
pital for a limited period of time. 
As a result of the debate regarding 
the "consortium" approach to liver 
and heart transplantation, the Task 
Force has developed guidelines for a 
"worthwhile" consortium, consistent 
with our other basic recommenda. 
tions. In order to prevent duplication, 
minimize the new capital expendi- 
tures, prevent the displacement of 
significant numbers of patients, and 
help assure high quality care, we be- 
lieve a formal cooperative agreement 
among all the hospitals involved in a 
consortium should be required by the 
Public Health Council. This agree- 
ment should insure that the  multiple^ 
hospital consortium arrangement is 
truly cooperative, and is run like a 
single, integrated medical service. 
Each applicant must, of course, in- 
dependently demonstrate its clinical 
ability, and the necessity of its in- 
volvement in transplantation from the 
public's perspective. A single set of 
patient selection and treatment proto- 
cols must be agreed upon and used, 
as well as a single set of data collec- 
tion criteria and an agreement to joint 
publication of all research, so that 
there will be a sound basis on which 
to make policy judgments after Phase 
One. To help formalize cooperation 
and maximize the utility of a group 
effort, written agreements regarding 
the interchange and common use of 
staff and students should he entered 
into, as well as agreement regarding 
the development of a common train- 
ing program, and efficient joint use of 
facilities and equipment. To coordi- 
nate all of this, and maintain records 
on it, a formal organization with a 
central staff and record file will be 
required. 
SECTION 11: THE STATE OF 
THE ART 
The first successful transplantation of 
a vascularized whole kidney under 
immunosuppressive chemotherapy 
was carried out in Boston in March, 
1962. This transplant was the culmi- 
nation of studies and experience 
spanning a decade of intensive work 
in the field. Since that time remarka- 
12 Lau: Medicine G HeaNh Care 
 ble progress has taken kidney trans- 
plantation from the realm of experi- 
mental surgery to a viable approach 
for the treatment of end stage renal 
(kidney) failure. While scientific and 
technical problems were being over- 
come, many social and ethical issues 
were raised. The medical community 
could not as easily address the politi- 
cal, economic and logistic questions 
created by this new technology. 
Experience with kidney di- 
alysis and transplantation has 
taught us that failure to plan 
can lead to tremendous unan- 
ticipated public expenditures 
and resource allocation prob- 
lems. 
~~~~ _______ 
This section contains a brief survey 
of the current status of organ trans- 
plantation as it pertains to the work of 
the Task Force. The emphasis is on 
experience with kidney transplanta- 
tion, the development, current vol- 
ume and outcomes of liver and heart 
transplantation, and on the develop 
ment of organ banking. Our intent is 
to present a broad overview of trans- 
plantation for the general reader. This 
precludes an exhaustive review of the 
most current literature which reflects 
changes reported each month. 
Discussion of any type of transplanr 
must address the goals of this treat- 
ment modality. I t  is often assumed 
that a transplant cures a patient of dis- 
ease. This is simply not true. For in- 
stance, atherosclerosis (hardening of 
the arteries), the major cause of heart 
disease and death, is not eliminated 
when a new heart is transplanted. The 
disease process of narrowing of the 
blood vessels continues, even in the 
transplanted heart. With every trans- 
plant, the body also has the burden of 
a foreign tissue (the new organ) with 
which to contend, and immunosup- 
pressive drugs must be taken for the 
remainder of the patient’s life to pre- 
vent rejection. Transplanration can 
improve life both in quantity and 
quality, but it rarely returns a patient 
to fully normal health. The primary 
goal of modern medical research re- 
mains that of understanding the 
cause, and prevention, of diseases so 
that eventually the need for trans- 
plant, and many other temporizing 
measures, will be eliminated. Until 
such time many technically complex 
procedures offer an improved quality 
of life for many patients. 
Transplantation of the Kidney 
Since the first transplant in 1962, it is 
estimated that more than 100,000 kid- 
ney transplants have been performed 
throughout the world. Publications in 
the medical literature concerning 
transplantation continue to grow rap  
idly, and today approximately 3,000 
medical articles appear annually on 
the subject. 
In 1982, more than 5,300 kidney 
transplants were performed in the 
United States. At present, nine hospi- 
tals in New England, seven o f  them in 
Massachusetts, each perform from 10 
to 57 procedures each vex. The total 
number of procedures performed in 
New England has steadily increased 
from 193 in 1978 and 257 in 1982, to 
an all time high of 313 in 1983 (in- 
cluding 19 pediatric patients),’ with 
kidneys harvested from both cadavers 
and living-related donors. 
As increasing numbers of trans- 
plants have been performed, survival 
rates of both the patient and the kid- 
ney graft have improved. In a recent 
study? 86 percent of recipients of kid- 
neys from unrelated donors survived 
one year, and 78 percent survived to 
three years. Of those receiving kid- 
neys from related donors. 95 percent 
survived to one year and 91 percent 
to three years. The reason that overall 
survival is better for people who have 
related donors is because there is less 
chance for kidney rejection. Kidney 
graft rejection exacts a huge toll on 
the patient with increased stress, 
higher likelihood of infection and a 
consequential higher mortality. Re- 
turn to dialysis and the possibility of a 
second graft remain an option. Graft 
retention rates have been lower than 
patient survival rates, and removal of 
rejected kidneys in cases where the 
graft is not successful has resulted in 
greatly reduced patient mortality. Re- 
tention rates for transplants from un- 
related donors are 56 percent for one 
year and 45 percent for three years, 
while 75 percent of organs from re- 
lated donors have been retained for 
one year, and 67 percent for three 
years. Due to improved immuno- 
suppression, graft retention rates have 
shown progressive and substantial in- 
creases. Patient survival rates im- 
proved drastically, and have recently 
remained stable6 
Kidney disease differs from other 
terminal, organ-specific diseases in 
two important ways. Since human 
beings possess two kidneys, and can 
live comfortably with one, it is possi- 
ble to obtain a healthy, well-matched 
kidney from a donor (livins or re- 
cently deceased). Secondly, and more 
importantly, dialysis is available as an 
alternative life-sustaining mrasure to 
assume the functions of the diseased 
kidney either on a long term basis or 
while the patient awaits a transplant. 
In addition, patients from whom a re- 
jected kidney is removed are able to 
return to dialysis. In 1983, of the 
69,409 patients on dialysis in the 
United States, 2,399 were in the New 
England area. Fewer than half of 
these patients are considered poten- 
tial candidates for a transplant, and in 
the entire United States only about 
6,000 are on a formal waiting list. 
Being a candidate is a function of or- 
gan availability, patient selection cri- 
teria, and patient preference. 
Treatment selection for patients 
with kidney failure is a choice be. 
tween dialysis and transplantation. If  
a patient suffers severe concomitant 
disease ( e g  widespread cancer, em- 
physema or liver failure) that will not 
be improved by receiving a trans- 
planted kidney, the patient will be a 
dialysis candidate. If  the patient has a 
disease, such as high blood pressure 
or diabetic retinopathy, which is 
likely to be improved by transplanta- 
tion, then the patient will preferably 
be selected for transplantation. An- 
other factor favoring transplantation is 
availability of a suitably-matched. liv- 
ing-related donor. The patient’s own 
wishes are paramount in any decision 
to seek transplantation. 
course, critical. There is an important 
skill and experience factor in success- 
ful performance of any complex med- 
ical team effort. Transplants seem to 
function best when supervised by a 
The transplant team itself is, of 
FebruarJx 1985 13 
 well-balanced professional group in a 
meclical center. Icleally, transplanta- 
tion should involve physicians and 
surgeons possessing a variety of skills 
and backgrounds and a hospital with 
services broad enough to carry the 
added burdens of blood banking. 
chemical treatments that are some- 
times toxic, treatment o f  severe dis- 
ease in other o r p n  systems, and re- 
jection. A well-balanced professional 
group in the field of kidney transplan- 
tation involves many skills including 
medical nephrology, cardiology, bac. 
teriology, immunology. surgery, vas- 
cular surgen, urology, S O C ~ J I  services, 
psychiatn, and teams experienced in 
troubleshooting both dialysis and 
transplantation. Even though it seems 
intuitively correct that niedical cen- 
ters with a larger number of patients, 
hence more experience, would he 
more successfiil in trmsplantation, 
some small groups have clone well on 
measures of mortality and morbidity. 
Unfortunately. other sm:ill groups 
have produced results which are not 
3s encouraging. At present, factors 
such as experience ancl professional 
balance niusi be u.eighed i n  deter- 
mining the likelihood of a favorable 
outcome. 
Throughout [hi. Report, kidney 
transplanta~ion IS  discussed as a use- 
f u l  henchn ia rk  h e ~ : i i ~ ~ e  i t  is estab- 
lished N o w  tlie foundations for trans- 
plantation o f  hext, liver, and other 
or#:cns must lie establishecl. The ex- 
pcr i rncr  \vith kidneys, and the les. 
sons learntd i n  tlie procurement of 
o r p i x .  1x1 t len t se Iection , rei nilx~rse - 
nivnt. ancl hroacl social policy, are 
often ~lpplicahle to other organ trans- 
plums. For example, kidney transplan- 
taticm has brought into sharp focus 
questions concerning public financ- 
ing of costly high technology proce- 
dures. Moreover, increasing accept- 
ance of the procedure by clinicians 
113s coincided with greater public 
awareness of the availability of these 
procedures and a willingness t o  par- 
ticipate in organ donor programs t~ 
utilize organs that would othemlse 
be lost in the unfortunate deaths of 
family members. The experience with 
kidney transplantation has demonstra. 
ted the imporrance of having social, 
financial, and ethical factors consid- 
ered, debated, and, if possible, re- 
solved, simultaneously with the de  
velopment of medical techniques. 
Transplantation of the  Heart 
Since 1967, approximately 900 heart 
transplants have been performed 
worldwide. 635 of those in the United 
States.- World experience in heart 
transplantation has been dominated 
by the work of Dr. Norman Shumway 
at Stanford University Medical Center, 
Palo Alto, California. Heart transplants 
performed on dogs by Dr. Shumway 
in 1958 anticipated the first human 
heart transplant in 1967 by Dr. Chris- 
tiaan Barnard in South Africa. Within a 
year, about 100 heart transplants were 
performed worldwide, but with dis- 
mal survival rates." 
patients at Stanford University were 
collected in four distinct temporal 
phases. First came a period when po- 
tential transplant patients were identi- 
fied. Shumway found candidates for 
the operation, but a transplant was not 
performed. Ninety percent died 
within two months, and all died 
within nine months. Second came the 
period between January, 1968 and 
December, 1973, in which there was 
an initial 45 percent survival rate. The 
remaining 55 percent of patients were 
lost in the operative or early hospital 
period. Survivorship subsequently de- 
clined to 25 percent at five years. In 
the third phase, January, 1974 through 
December, 1980, initial survival rates 
improved to 62 percent at one year, 
and 45 percent at five years. In the 
fourth and most recent phase, Decem- 
ber, 1980 through May, 1983, survival 
rates improved to 82 percent at one 
!-ear, and 78 percent at two years, 
with estimates of 65 percent at five 
years? 
The fairly dramatic improvement in 
survival rates appears to be the result 
of at least three medical factors: im- 
proved clinical and operative manage- 
ment, improved immunosuppression, 
including the introduction of a new 
and seemingly more effective drug, 
Cyclosporin A, and improved patient 
selection. N o  one factor can be iso- 
lated as the most important reason for 
increased survival rates. 
An enhanced outlook for both sur- 
Data for survival of heart transplant 
vival and a return to normal life ap. 
pears to have added momentum to in- 
terest in transplantation: the 172 heart 
transplants performed in the United 
States in 1983 represent nearly one 
third of the total heart transplant op. 
erations since 1967. These transplants 
were performed at eleven transplant 
centers throughout the nation. World- 
wide, heart transplant operations are 
conducted in Canada, Great Britain, 
France, and South Africa. Of the 635 
United States heart transplants, 295, 
or 46 percent, are still living. The cur  
rent total one year survival rate is 80 
percent and a two year survival rate of 
75 percent is projected.'" One year 
survival has gone from 44 percent in 
1973 to 88 percent in 1983. Presently 
the leading causes of deaths are infec- 
tion, acute rejection. graft arterioscle- 
rosis, and malignancy." 
The decision of when extreme 
and expensive medical tech- 
nologies should be generally 
available should be made only 
after the clinical, social, and 
economic consequences of in- 
troducing the procedure, in- 
cluding cost-effectiveness, 
ethical implications, and long- 
term effects on society, are 
studied and reviewed by a 
publicly accountable body. 
Estimates of potential annual need 
are extremely variable and range from 
1,000 to 75,000 nationwide, and from 
20 to 1,800 in Massachusetts. Condi- 
tions which may necessitate heart 
transplantation include intractable 
heart failure of several causes, coro- 
nary obstructive disease, cardiomyop- 
athy and, in young people, congenital 
heart disease and tumors. The larger 
national estimate assumes that one 
out of e v e n  four patients less than 50 
years of age and dying of cardiac dis- 
ease might be a candidate for cardiac 
transplantation." The smaller national 
estimate is based on a series of selec- 
tion criteria and contraindications to 
transplantation developed at Stanford 
University.'3 For Massachusetts, the 
larger estimate is simply a proportion- 
ate share of the national figure based 
14 Lou: Mrdrrrrrr €- Hralrh Care 
 on  population. A more conservative 
figure of 109 operations annually was 
arrived at by applying more rigid cri. 
teria: limiting patient age to 15-49, 
eliminating those with kidney disease 
or diabetes, and subtracting the one  
third who unfortunately might b e  ex- 
pected to die while awaiting a trans- 
plant. The estimate of about 20 was 
put forth to the Task Force by the 
three hospitals in Massachusetts pro- 
posing to  d o  heart transplantation in 
May, 1984. The great variability in 
these estimates leads to a conclusion 
that we simply d o  not know what 
either the "demand" or 'need" for 
heart transplants is likely to be with 
any degree of certainty. 
Transplantation of the Heart and 
Lungs 
The transplantation of heart and lungs 
is still in irs nscenx sage .  It remains 
in the realm of such experimental 
procedures as the artificial heart and 
pancreatic transplant. Initial explora- 
tion of the double transplant (heart 
and lungs) is encouraging, but the 
procedure has not yet been employed 
on a scale large enough to provide 
mortality parameters similar to the 
worldwide experience with kidneys, 
hearts, and livers. 
Approximately 23 heartjlung trans- 
plants have been performed, includ- 
ing 17 at Stanford University under 
the direction of Dr. Shumway. Other 
centers performing the procedure are 
the University of Pittsburgh and Johns 
Hopkins University. Of the 17 trans- 
plants performed at Stanford, 11 pa- 
tients are alive including the first pa- 
tient transplanted in March, 1981.'' 
plant suffer either from pulmonary 
hypertension or Eisenmenger's Syn- 
drome. These two conditions are un- 
usual diseases of varied etiology 
which have in common concomitant 
disease of heart and lungs. N o  single 
replacement of either heart or lungs 
ameliorates these conditions and at 
present no other mode of treatment 
has met with success. Both pulmonary 
hypertension and Eisenmenger syn- 
drome are relatively rare but serious 
illnesses with a high mortality. Suc- 
cessful transplantation of the heart 
and lungs together involves identical 
Patients needing a heart/lung trans- 
determinants of success (immuno- 
suppression, team experience and 
balance, specialized clinical knowl- 
edge) that characterize all other or- 
gans. 
Transplanration of t h e  Liver 
Initial experimental whole organ 
transplantation of the liver by the 
method now used in patients was re- 
ported from Boston in 1959;" four 
clinical liver transplants were con. 
ducted in Boston in 1963-1965 with- 
out success. Since that time, the majox 
work in this field has been conducted 
by Dr. Roy Calne at Cambridge Uni- 
versity, England, and Dr. Thomas 
Starzl, formerly of Denver, Colorado, 
now in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 
Recently tabulated results by 
CalneI6 from four centers cover 466 
liver transplants in 434 patients from 
1963 to 1982. Of these, 163 are now 
alive, while 36 died within six 
months. A total of 123 (28 percent) 
are living three years or more after 
the transplant. Dr. Starzl has prepared 
actuarial curves contrasting the data 
from his Denver-Pittsburgh centers 
for 1963-79 with that from 1980-82. 
One-year survival has increased from 
approximately 30 percent prior to 
1979'- to approximately 60 percent in 
1980-82.'" 
Projections of the need for liver 
transplants in Massachusetts are based 
on estimates of the prevalence of cer- 
tain liver diseases. About 90 percent 
of all deaths from liver disease in 
Massachusetts are a result of cirrhosis 
(alcoholic and post-hepatitic) and 
hepatitis. Important minor causes are 
primary biliary cirrhosis and biliary 
atresia. Dr. Starzl estimates the poten- 
tial need for liver transplantation to 
be approximately 20 per  million pop- 
ulation or 114 patients in Massachu- 
setts and 246 in New England, al- 
though based on  actual experience in 
Massachusetts, these estimates seem 
high. 
A unique feature of liver transplan- 
tation is the presence of two distinct 
patient populations in need of trans- 
plants. Adults, who have several 
causes of liver failure (e.g., hepatitis 
and alcoholic cirrhosis) and various 
underlying diseases (e-g., coronary ar- 
rev disease, emphysema), and chil- 
dren, of whom 90 percent of those 
suffering liver failure have a congeni- 
tal disease called extrahepatic biliary 
atresia (a disease affecting the secre- 
tion of bile). The problems that face 
these groups are very different, and 
these distinct patient populations are 
often evaluated separately. A group 
may be prepared to d o  liver trans- 
plants in children based on their own 
experience or based on prognostic, 
ethical or technical considerations. 
The same group may not be prepared 
to d o  liver transplantation in adults. A 
second clinical center may decide just 
the opposite. Projections for liver 
transplantation in children are based 
on several data sets. Extrahepatic bili- 
ary atresia has an incidence of one in 
8,000 to 10,000 live births. About 30 
percent of these cases will be aided 
by other surgical procedures and will 
not require an early transplant. On  
the basis of existing data. seven Mas- 
sachusetts children annually could be 
expected to have bilian, atresia re- 
quiring a transplant. 
Issues i n  Immunosuppression 
One of the major problems inherent 
in organ transplantation is rejection of 
the grafted organ by the recipient's 
immune system. To control rejection, 
drugs which suppress the immune 
system are administered post-opera- 
tively. Since its introduction in Boston 
in 1961, Azathioprine (Imuran) has 
been the srandard drug, often used 
with cortisone. Now, cvclosporin of- 
fers promise of improvement. Cyclo. 
sporin A is produced by the Sandoz 
Corporation, in Basel, Switzerland, 
and marketed under the name San- 
dimmune. Though many have attrib- 
uted the increased survival of trans- 
plant patients to cyclosporin, it is pre- 
mature to give i t  full credit. The drug 
has been in use in the United States 
for a limited period of time and the 
most current data" reveal more pro- 
found toxicity than previously appre- 
ciated. Considering the limited data, 
apparent toxicity, and a cost of $6000 
per year, the drug should not be used 
as the sole or major impetus for en-  
couraging expanded transplantation 
volume. More credit should be given 
to the growing experience, better sur- 
gical technique, better patient selec- 
 tion, and better postoperative man- 
agement and immunosuppressive reg- 
imens. Further research and time is 
needed to evaluate more fully the 
role of cyclosporin in transplant im- 
munosuppression. The potential ben- 
efits of using cyclosporin are exciting, 
but enthusiasm must be tempered un- 
til more information is available. 
Organ Procurement and Banking: 
Coordination and Regionalization 
Organ transplantation is unique in 
that it involves two human beings in a 
technology-mediated exchange of live 
organs: one human (alive or dead) 
donates an organ to a diseased recipi- 
ent. Living kidney donors (either re. 
lated or unrelated) were initially used 
because kidneys are paired organs. 
Even at the very outset of the kidney 
program, however. it was clear that 
cadaver tissues would also be  used 
and that timing, preservation, and 
transportation of organs would be 
central to success. For livers, hearts, 
and heart-lungs, all donors must be 
deceased persons who meet brain 
death criteria and whose respiration is 
mechanically maintained; in many in- 
stances postmortem survival of other 
organs is assured by temporary pump- 
oxygenation support of the circula- 
tion. 
With the growing need for fresh 
and viable organs, it became apparent 
that kidney transplants could be man- 
aged best on a regional basis with a 
central clearing house of clinical in- 
formation on donors and recipients. 
The New England Organ Bank was 
one of the first regional organ banks 
established, and today transplant pa- 
tients in Boston receive organs from 
as far away as the Midwest and South- 
east. Moreover, the various regional 
banks in the country trade organs ex- 
tensively according to supply and de- 
mand: a recent study showed that 
transplantations conducted in Rich- 
mond, Virginia, used organs harvested 
as far away as Massachusetts and 
Texas. An expanded regional organ 
banking system would have to be an 
integral part of any initiatives taken in 
Massachusetts for the transplantation 
of livers, hearts, or hearts and lungs. 
Successful organ banking requires 
cooperation at five levels of public 
and professional activity: public edu- 
cation, hospital preparedness, surgical 
training, organ preservation and trans- 
portation, and centralized coordinat- 
ing and dispatching. 
A central coordinating organization 
must possess a list of potential organ 
recipients and maintain communica- 
tion with regional hospitals in the 
Massachusetts Task Force on Organ Transplantation 
George J.  Annas, J.D., M.P.H., 
Edward R. Utley Professor of 
Boston University School of Public 
Boston 
Charle.\ Atkins 
Massachusetts Commissioner of 
Boston 
kihhi Hcwiiaii J .  Blumberg 
Director. N e w  England Region 
American Jewish Committee 
Boston 
Senator Edward L. Burke 
Chairperson, Health Care Commit- 
Massachusetts Senate 
Boston 
Lee A. Calhoun 
Boston 
Elizdbrrh Connell 
President 
Life Insurance Association of Mas- 
Boston 
Chairman 
Health Law 
Health 
Public Welfare 
tee 
sachusetts 
Father James W. DeAdder 
Professor of Philosophy and Moral 
Pope John XXIII Seminary 
Weston 
Sister Janet Eisner, S.N.D. 
President 
Emmanuel College 
Boston 
David Frost 
President 
Blue Cross of Massachusetts 
Boston 
Paula Gold 
Secretary 
Executive Office of Consumer Af- 
Boston 
Donald Melville 
President 
The Norton Company 
Worcester 
Francis Moore, M.D. 
Moseley Professor of Surgery 
Harvard Medical School 
Boston 
Theology 
fairs & Business Regulation 
Emeritus 
Mitchell T. Rabkin, M.D. 
President 
Beth Israel Hospital 
Boston 
David Robbins 
Financial Analyst 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Boston 
Marc Roberts, Ph.D. 
Professor of Political Economy, 
Harvard School of Public Health 
Boston 
Paul Russell, M.D. 
Chief, Transplantation Unit 
Massachusetts General Hospital 
Boston 
Representative Richard A. Voke 
Chairperson, Health Care Commit- 
Massachusetts House of Repre- 
Boston 
Joan M. Gorga (staff) 
Massachusetts Department of Pub. 
Boston 
Health Policy and Management 
tee 
sentatives 
lic Health 
 event an organ becomes available. In 
addition to data assembly and infor- 
mation dispersal a central organiza- 
tion has the responsibility of acting 
within the time restraints that perisha- 
ble organs require. 
The New England Organ Bank 
serves as a role model. It is rapidly 
expanding its tissue procurement pro- 
grams, and continues to build public 
support that will benefit additional 
transplant programs. The New Eng- 
land Organ Bank, however, cannot 
function without adequate support 
from all agencies; fiscal support of its 
work must be considered an integral 
part of the cost of tissue transplanta- 
tion. 
Public Educatiot?: Media attkntion 
given to several recent transplant pa- 
tients has heightened public aware- 
ness of the procedure. and a new 
level of awareness was reached in the 
spring of 1984 with the proclamation 
by President Ronald Reagan of Na- 
tional Organ Donation Awareness 
Week, April 22-28. With activities 
such as this, the possibility of donat- 
ing or bequeathing organs is gaining 
public acceptance. Even though laws 
in all states permit individuals to sign 
donor cards, very few doctors and 
hospitals will use the organs of such a 
person without the added consent of 
the next of kin. A vigorous campaign 
to educate the public and health 
professionals including doctors, hos- 
pital personnel, medical examiners 
and coroners, would be extremely 
helpful. The media could educate by 
indicating to the public the need for 
their cooperation and the benefits to 
society of active participation. The air- 
ing of documentaries and public serv- 
ice announcements would probably 
best achieve these goals rather than 
the publicizing of dramatic isolated 
cases. In several instances the fami- 
lies of recently deceased teenage 
children have been the prime movers 
in making those precious organs 
available to others; they have found 
some solace, in their grief, in helping 
others. The public, through the me- 
dia, is most receptive to such knowl- 
edge, and is educated thereby; but 
careful steps should b e  taken to guard 
the confidentiality of patient informa- 
tion and maintain the anonymity of 
donors. 
Hoqital Preparedness: Tissue des- 
tined for transplant must be obtained 
by an experienced physician. Respira- 
tion is generally maintained mechani- 
cally, and is continued after death to 
permit the organs to survive. As many 
as eighr tissues or organs may be har- 
vested: eyes, skin, bones, heart, kid- 
neys, liver, and lungs. To maximize 
the value of these scarce resources, 
hospitals involved in the chain of do- 
nation require trained personnel, so- 
phisticated equipment, communica- 
tion systems, and cooling devices. 
Surgco?r Trarningr The surgical 
procedure for harvesting kidneys is 
fairly simple. In New England, sur- 
geons cooperating with the Organ 
Bank have obtained expertise in re- 
moving kidneys. In the case of livers 
and hearts. a surgeon from the hospi- 
tal where the recipient is being cared 
for will most likely be dispatched to 
remove the tissue from the donor and 
supervise its return. Such capability 
and preparedness require special 
training, communication networks 
and transportation systems. 
Preservation and Transportation: 
"The faster, the colder, the better," 
best describes the goal of teams that 
carry living organs from one hospital 
to another. Properly handled and at- 
tached to a special oxygenating de- 
vice, a kidney can remain viable for 
72-96 hours after harvest; presently, 
hearts and livers perish after 12 hours. 
The excitement and urgency of the 
transportation of a liver or heart make 
for a dramatic newsworthy event. The 
media often cover these stories, 
which can help in public education as 
already mentioned. 
Considerations of Brain Death 
In the area of death, the law has al- 
ways been and remains that an indi- 
vidual is dead when a licensed physi- 
cian pronounces him dead, so long as 
the physician makes the determina- 
tion based on "accepted medical stan- 
d a r d ~ . " ~ "  Brain death has been an "ac- 
cepted medical standard" for more 
than a decade, and every court that 
has examined the question, including 
the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial 
Court, has agreed that brain death is a 
legally proper determination for a 
physician to make whether or not 
there is a state statute on  the sub- 
ject.2' Where physicians are unclear 
about this, education is indicated. 
Uniform legislation does not, how- 
ever, overcome deeply held convic- 
tions or conventions. For example, al- 
though the Uniform Anatomical Gift 
Act, which is law in all 50 swtcs, 
makes a person's donation of an o r -  
gan by use of a donor card effective 
upon declaration of death. almost no 
physician or hospital will in fact use 
the person's organ without permis- 
sion of the next of kin. This perniis- 
sion is not Iegalb. required, but ap- 
pears to be sought for personal. psy 
chological and perhaps public rela- 
tions reasons. The presence of the do. 
nor card, however, probahly does 
make the relatives more likely to 
agree to the donation. 
Sales 
One of the most bizarre proposals to 
increase the supply of kidneys has 
been to develop a "kidney exchange" 
which would put willing sellers in 
touch with willing buyers. This pro- 
posal has occasioned an outcry from 
those who believe it will exploit the 
poor, bring commercialism into the 
transplantation field, and decrease the 
supply of donated organs. The Con. 
gress and a number o f  state legibla- 
tures are currently considering Iegis- 
lation to outlaw such Sales, although 
there have as yet been n o  reports of 
actual sales having taken place in the 
United States, and the position of the 
transplant surgeons is that they will 
not transplant an organ which has 
been privately paid for. Since wc do 
permit the poor t o  take all sorts of 
occupational risks with their bodies, it 
does seem somewhat paternalistic not 
to permit them to take this one. 
Nonetheless, this is a highly visible 
and symbolic exploitation, and one 
that has the potential to undermine 
society's belief in the integrity of the 
entire transplantation enterprise.*' 
Therefore it seems reasonable t o  the 
Task Force to strongly oppose organ 
sales, and if a credible attempt to es- 
tablish a sales network ever develops, 
state laws directly outlawing such 
sales would be appropriate. 
 SECTION IV: PATIENT 
SELECTION AND RATIONING 
SCHEMES 
In an era of scarce resources, deci- 
sions concerning which patients will 
receive the resources must he 
Unless we decide to make heart and 
liver transplantation available to no 
one,  or available to everyone, some 
rationing scheme must be used to  
choose among potential transplant 
candidates. The debate has existed 
throughout the history of medical eth- 
ics. Traditionally it has been usually 
stated as a choice between saving one 
of t ~ v o  patients. both of whom require 
the immediate assistance of the only 
available physician to survive. More 
recently, national attention was fo- 
cused on decisions regarding the ra- 
tioning of kidney dialysis machines 
when they were firsr used on 3 lim. 
ited basis in the late 1960's. As one 
commentator clescribecl the debate 
within the medical profession: 
Shall machines or organs go to 
the sickest. o r  to the ones with 
most promise of recovery; on a 
first-come. first-served basis; to 
the most "valuahle" patient 
(based on wealth. education, po- 
sition. what?); to the one with the 
most dependents: to women and 
chilclren first; IO those who can 
pay: i o  whom? Or should lots be 
c ~ s t .  impersonally and uncriti- 
c.,11,.>2* 
In Seattle. Washington. an anony- 
motis screening committee was set up 
t o  pick \\-I10 miioiig competing candi- 
cl:ites w i i i l d  receive [lie life-saving 
technology. One lay member of the 
wreening committee is quoted as say- 
ing: 
The choices \vew hard . . . 1 re- 
member voting against 3 young 
woman xvho tvas a known prosti- 
tute. I found I couldn't vote for 
her, rather than another candi- 
date. a young wife and mother. I 
also v o ~ e d  against 3 young man 
who, until he learned he had 
renal hilure, had been a ne'er 
do-well, 3 real playboy. He prom- 
ised he \vould reform hi5 charac- 
ter, go hack t o  school, and so on, 
if only he were selected for treat- 
ment. But I felt I'd lived long 
enough to know that a person 
like that won't really d o  what he 
was promising at the time.25 
When the biases and "selection cri- 
teria" of the committee were made 
public, there was a general negative 
reaction against this type of arbitrary 
device. Two experts reacted to the 
'numbing accounts of how close to 
the surface lie the prejudices and 
mindless cliches that pollute the com- 
mittee's deliberations," by concluding 
that the committee was "measuring 
persons in accordance with its own 
middle-class values." The committee 
process, they noted, ruled out "crea- 
tive nonconformists" and made the 
Pacific Northwest "no place for a 
Henry David Thoreau with bad kid- 
neys."2' 
To avoid having to make such ex- 
plicit, arbitrary, "social worth" deter- 
minations, the Congress in 1972 en-  
acted legislation that provided federal 
funds to cover virtually all kidney di- 
alysis and kidney transplantation pro- 
cedures in the United s t a t e ~ . ~ '  This 
decision, however, simply served to 
postpone the time, which is fast arriv- 
ing, when identical decisions will 
have to be made about candidates for 
heart and liver transplantation in a so- 
ciety that does not provide sufficient 
financial and medical resources to 
provide all "suitable" candidates with 
the operation. 
There are four major approaches to 
rationing scarce medical resources: 
(1) the market approach; (2) the se- 
lection committee approach; ( 3 )  the 
lottery approach: and ( 4 )  the 'cus- 
tomary" approach.'" 
The Market Approach 
The market approach would provide 
an organ to everyone who could pay 
for it out of their own funds or 
through private insurance. I t  puts a 
very high value on individual rights, 
and a very low value on equality and 
fairness It has properly been criti- 
cized on a number of bases, including 
that the transplant technologies have 
been developed and are supported 
with public funds, that medical re- 
sources used for transplantation will 
not be available for other, perhaps 
higher priority, care, and that finan- 
cial success alone is an insufficient 
justification for demanding a medical 
procedure. Most telling, however, is 
its complete lack of concern for fair- 
ness and equity. In the words of the 
President's Commission for the Study 
of Ethical Problems in Medicine and 
Biomedical and Behavioral Research: 
'In light of the special importance of 
health care, the largely undeserved 
character of differences in health sta- 
tus. and the uneven distribution and 
unpredictability of health care needs. 
society has a moral obligation to en-  
sure adequate care for 
A "bake sale" or charity approach 
that requires the less financially for- 
tunate to make public appeals for 
funding is demeaning to the individ. 
uals involved, and to our  society as a 
whole. Rationing by financial ability 
says that we d o  not believe in equality 
and that we do believe that a price 
can and should be placed on  human 
life and that it should be paid by the 
individual whose life is at stake. Nei. 
[her belief is tolerable in a society in 
which income is inequitably distrib- 
uted. 
The Committee Selection Process 
The Seattle Selection Committee rep- 
resents a model of the committee 
process. "Ethics Committees" set up 
in some hospitals to decide whether 
or not certain handicapped newborn 
infants should be given medical care 
may represent another. These com- 
mittees have developed because it  
was seen as unworkable or unwise to 
explictly set forth the criteria OII 
which selection decisions would be 
made. But only two results are possi- 
ble, as Professor Guido Calabresi has 
pointed out: either a pattern of deci- 
sion making will develop or it will 
not. If a pattern does develop (e.g., in 
Seattle, the imposition of middle-class 
values), then it can be articulated and 
those decision 'rules" codified and 
used directly, without resort to the 
committee; i f ,  on  the other hand, 3 
pattern does not develop, the com- 
mittee is vulnerable to the charge that 
it is acting arbitrarily, or dishonestly, 
and therefore cannot be permitted to 
continue to make such important de -  
c i s i o n ~ . ~ ~  
18 Lau: .lfediciiie F- Hralrh Care 
 In the end, public designation of a 
committee to make selection deci- 
sions on  vague or non-specific criteria 
will fail because it too closely in- 
volves the state and all members of 
society in explicitly preferring spe- 
cific individuals over others, and in 
disregarding the interests those others 
have in living. It thus directly under- 
mines, as surely as the market system 
does, society’s view of equality and 
the value of human life. 
The Lottery Approach 
The lottery approach is the ultimate 
equalizer which puts equality ahead 
of every other value. This makes it  
extremely attractive, since all comers 
have an equal chance at selection re- 
gardless of race, color. creed, finan- 
cial status, etc. On the other hand, it 
offends our notions of efficency and 
fairness since it makes 110 distinctions 
among the strength of the desires of 
the candidates, their potential sur- 
vival, their quality of life, etc. In this 
sense ir is a “mindless” method of 
trying to solve society’s dilemma 
which is caused by its unwillingness 
or inability to spend enough re- 
sources to make a lottery unneces- 
sary. By making this macro spending 
decision clear to all, it thereby also 
undermines society’s view of the 
pricelessness of human life. A first- 
come, first-served system is a type of 
lottery since referral to a transplant 
program is generally done randomly 
in time. Nonetheless, higher income 
groups may have quicker access to re- 
ferral networks and thus have an in- 
herent advantage over the poor in a 
strict first-come, first-served system.” 
The Customary Approach 
Traditionally, society has attempted to 
avoid explicitly recognizing that we 
are making a choice not to save indi- 
vidual lives because i t  is too expen- 
sive to d o  so. As long as such deci- 
sions are not explicitly acknowl- 
edged, they can be tolerated by soci- 
ety. For example. until this year there 
was said to be a general understand- 
ing among general practitioners in 
Britain that individuals over 55 suffer- 
ing from end-stage kidney disease not 
be referred for dialysis or transplant. 
In 1984, however, this unwritten prac- 
tice has become highly publicized, 
with figures that show a rate of new 
cases of end-stage kidney disease 
treated in Britain at 40 per million 
(versus the United States figure of 80 
per million) resulting in 1500-3000 
‘unnecessary deaths” annually.” This 
has, predictably, led to movements to 
enlarge the National Health Services 
budget to expand dialysis services to 
meet this need, a more socially ac- 
ceptable solution than permitting the 
now publicly recognized situation to 
continue 
In the United States, the “custom- 
ary” approach permits individual phy- 
sicians to select their patients on  the 
basis of “medical criteria” or “clinical 
suitability’‘ which may, in Fact, contain 
much that we would consider “social 
worth” criteria if they were explicitly 
spelled out. F o r  example, one crite- 
rion, common in the transplant litera- 
ture, requires an individual to have 
sufficient family support for success- 
ful after-care. This discriminates 
against individuals without families 
and those who have become alienated 
from their families.’’ The criterion 
may be relevant, but it is hardly medi. 
cal. 
The major public policy issue 
in organ transplantation is 
how to move toward three 
goals simultaneously: quality 
of services, equality of access 
to services, and cost contain- 
ment. 
Similar observations can be made 
about “medical” criteria that include 
I.Q., mental illness, criminal records, 
employment, indigency, alcoholism, 
drug addiction, or geographical loca- 
tion. Age is perhaps more difficult, 
since it may be at least impressionisti- 
cally related to outcome. But it is not 
medically logical to assume that an 
individual who is 19 years old is nec- 
essarily a better medical candidate for 
a transplant than one who is 50 years 
old. Unless specific examination of 
the characteristics of older persons 
that make them less desirable candi- 
dates is undertaken, such a cut-off is 
arbitrary, and thus devalues the lives 
of older citizens. The same can be 
said of blanket exclusions of alcohol- 
ics and drug addicts.3‘ 
In short, the customary approach 
has one great advantage for society 
and one great disadvantage: it gives 
us the illusion that we don’t have to 
make choices: but the cost is mass de-  
ception, and when this deception is 
uncovered, we must deal with it 
either by universal entitlement or by 
choosing another method of patient 
selection. 
A Combination of Approaches 
Any approach selected. to be socially 
acceptable, must he fair, efficient. and 
reflective of important social values. 
The most important values at stake in 
organ transplantation are fairness i t -  
self, equity in the sense of equality, 
and the value of life. To promote effi- 
ciency. it is important that no one re- 
ceive a transplant unless they are 
likely t o  obtain benefit from it in the 
sense of increased length of life at a 
reasonable level of functioning. 
Accordingly, it is appropriate for 
there to be an initial screening proc- 
ess that is based ex-clusiiwlyon medi- 
cal criteria designed to measure the 
probability of a “successful” trans. 
plant, i x . .  one in which the patient 
survives for a considerable length o f  
time and is rehabilitated. Of course 
there is room in “medical criteria” for 
social worth judgments. and there is 
probably no way to avoid this com 
pletely. For example, it has been 
noted that “in many respects social 
and medical criteria are inextricably 
intertwined” and that therefore niedi- 
cal criteria might “exclude the poor 
and disadvantaged because health and 
socioeconomic status are highly inter- 
dependent.”35 Roger Evans notes an 
example. In the End Stage Renal Dis- 
ease Program, “those of lower socio- 
economic status are likely to have 
multiple comorbid health conditions 
such as diabetes, hepatitis, and hyper- 
tension” making them both less desir- 
able candidates and more expensive 
to treat.% 
To prevent the gulf between the 
haves and have-nots from widening, 
we must make every reasonable at- 
tempt to develop medical criteria that 
are objective and independent of so- 
Februav 1385 19 
 cia1 worth categories. One minimal 
way to approach this is to require that 
medical screening criteria in the state 
be uniform and that the criteria 
adopted be reviewed and approved by 
an ethics committee with significant 
public representation, filed with a 
public agency, and made readily avail- 
able to the public for comment. I n  
~~~ ~ 
We concur with the conclu- 
sions of the President’s Com- 
mission for the Study of Ethi- 
cal Problems in Medicine & 
Biomedical and Behavioral 
Research society has an ethi- 
cal obligation to ensure equi- 
table access to health care for 
all; and the cost of achieving 
equitable access ought to be 
shared fairly. 
~~~ 
the event that more than one hospital 
in the state is offering a particular 
transplant service, it would be most 
fair and efficient for the individual 
hospitals to perform rhe initial medi- 
cal screening themselves (based on 
the uniform, objective criteria), but to 
have all subsequent non-medical se- 
lection done by a method approved 
by a single selection committee com. 
posed of representatives of a11 hospi- 
tals engaged in the particular trans- 
plant procedure. as well as members 
o f  the Department of Public Hralth 
and significant representation of the 
puhlic at large. 
As this implies, after the nietlical 
screening is performrd, there may be 
more acceptable candidates in the 
“pool” than there are organs or  sur- 
gical teams to go around.  If  (and only 
i f )  this is so, some selection among 
waiting candidates will have to be 
made. This situation occurs in kidney 
transplantation now, but since the or- 
gan marching is much more sophisti. 
cated than in hearts and livers (per- 
mitting much more precise matching 
of  organ and recipient), and since di- 
alysis permits individuals to wait al- 
most indefinitely for an organ without 
risking death, the situations are not 
close enough to permit use of the 
same selection criteria for hearts and 
livers.” On the other hand, to the ex- 
tent that organs are specifically tissue- 
and size-matched and fairly distrib- 
uted to the “best matched” candidate, 
the organ distribution system itself 
will be a natural random allocation 
system. 
no shortage of hospital space or sur- 
gical teams to perform transplants. 
Nevertheless, it is possible that at 
some time in the future there will de- 
velop a “pool” of acceptable candi- 
dates and that choices will have to be 
made among members of this pool as 
to who gets the next available, suita- 
ble organ. It is here that we must 
make a choice between using con- 
scious, value-laden, social worth se- 
lection criteria (including a commit- 
tee to make the actual choice), or 
some type of random device. In view 
of the unacceptability and arbitrari- 
ness of social wonh criteria being ap- 
plied, implicitly or explicitly, by com- 
mittee, the Task Force does not be- 
lieve such a process is viable or 
proper. On the other hand, strict ad- 
herence to a lottery might create a 
situation where an individual who has 
only a one in four chance of living 
five years with a transplant (but who 
could survive another six months 
without one) would get an organ be- 
fore an individual who could survive 
as long or longer. but who will die 
within days or hours if he or she does 
not immediately receive a transplant. 
At present in Massachusetts there is 
Fairness and equity demand 
that no one be excluded from 
the pool of potential recipi- 
ents because of social class, 
ability to pay, family situa- 
tion, or place of residence in 
New England. 
Accordingly, we believe the most rea- 
sonable approach would be to gener- 
ally allocate organs on a firsr-come, 
first-served basis to members of the 
pool, with individuals being able to 
“jump” the queue if the second level 
selection committee believes they are 
in immediate danger of death and the 
person who would otherwise get the 
organ can survive long enough to be 
reasonably assured that he or she will 
be able to get another organ. 
We adopt the first-come, first- 
served method of basic selection 
(after a medical screen) because it 
most closely approximates the ran. 
donmess of a straight lottery, without 
having the obviousness of promoting 
equity as the only value. Some unfair- 
ness is introduced by the fact that the 
more wealthy and medically astute 
will likely get into the pool first, and 
thus be ahead in line, but this advan- 
tage should decrease sharply as pub- 
lic awareness of the program grows. 
The possibility of unfairness is also 
inherent in permitting individuals to 
jump the queue, but the necessity for 
approval by a committee with signifi- 
cant public representarion on it de- 
creases the likelihood of medical fa- 
voritism, and such an exception 
seems reasonable to protect our view 
of the value of life (see Table). 
Society will have to face the reality 
that should the resources devoted to 
organ transplantation be limited (as 
they are now and are likely to be in 
the future), at some point it is likely 
that significant numbers of individ- 
uals will die in the “pool” waiting for 
a transplant. There are three things 
that can be done to avoid this: (1) 
medical criteria can be made stricter, 
perhaps by adding a more rigorous 
notion of ”quality” of life to longevity 
and prospects for rehabilitation; (2)  
cesources devoted to transplantation 
and organ procurement can be in- 
creased; or (3) individuals can be 
persuaded not to attempt to join the 
Of these three options. only num- 
ber 3 has the promise of both con. 
serving resources and promoting indi- 
vidual autonomy. While we assume 
that most persons medically eligible 
for a transplant would want one, we 
also assume that at l eas  some would 
not-at least if they understood all 
that was involved, including the need 
for a lifetime commitment to daily 
immunosuppression medications and 
periodic medical moniroring for re- 
jection symptoms. Accordingly, it 
makes public policy sense to publi- 
cize the risks and side-effects of trans- 
plantation, and to require that careful 
explanations of the procedure be 
given to prospective patients before 
pool. 
 they undergo medical screening. It 
may be that by the time patients come 
to the transplant center they have 
their minds made up and would d o  
anything to get the transplant. None- 
theless, if there are patients who, 
when confronted with all the facts, 
would voluntarily elect not to pro- 
ceed, we enhance both their own 
freedom and the efficiency and cost- 
effectiveness of the transplantation 
system by screening them out as early 
as possible. 
SECTION VII: 
REIMBURSEMENT POLICIES 
FOR ORGAN 
TRANSPLANTATION 
Faced with rapid advances in technol- 
ogy and increasing costs. health plan- 
ners, regulators and third party payors 
are being challenged to develop new 
policies and programs for payment of 
organ transplantation. This section de-  
scribes the policies of the federal gov- 
ernment, Medicare, State Medicaid 
programs, Blue Cross/Blue Shield, 
commercial insurers and policies in 
some other countries. 
Federal Policy 
With the exception of kidney trans- 
plants funded by the End Stage Renal 
Disease (ESRD) program of Medicare, 
there is no federal policy on  organ 
transplantation. The Medicare pro- 
gram is administered by the Health 
Care Financing Administration 
(HCFA), a division of the Department 
of Health and Human Services 
(HHS), which determines procedures 
covered and appropriate levels of 
reimbursement. Medicare has la- 
belled hean and liver transplants as 
experimental and has thus not author- 
ized payment for these procedures. 
However, transplantation is moving 
rapidly from the realm of human ex- 
perimentation to therapy, and new 
criteria for reimbursement are emerg- 
ing. In 1980. Patricia Robert Harris, 
Secretary of HHS, announced that 
new technologies must be evaluated 
not only on the traditional bases of 
safety and efficacy, but also on  cost- 
effectiveness and long range social, 
economic and ethical considerations. 
At a press conference on  June 12, 
1980, Secretary Harris stated: 
A final decision on  coverage of 
hean transplants under Medicare, 
whatever that decision shall be, 
must be fully justified by a clear 
and careful analysis of all perti- 
nent facts about which the public 
is fully informed. Heart transplan. 
tation illustrates the complex pol- 
icy issues presented by rapidly 
advancing medical technologies 
and procedures. I t  is incumbent 
on all of us-the government, the 
medical profession, and the pub- 
lic-to assess carefully the safety, 
efficacy and the social conse- 
quences of new procedures he- 
fore financing their wide dissemi- 
nation. I fully expect that studies 
of the sort we propose for heart 
transplantation will become in. 
creasingly necessary in the years 
ahead. 
In November 1979 HCFA author- 
ized Medicare payment for heart 
transplants at Stanford University 
Medical Center. Payment, which was 
authorized temporarily pending de-  
velopment of final criteria for  cover^ 
age, was discontinued effective June 
13, 1980 due to lack of sufficient in. 
formation concerning a patient selec- 
tion process, long term social, eco- 
nomic, and ethical consequences of 
the procedure. and the potential for 
national expansion of the transplant 
procedure. Several months later the 
Medicare program solicited hospitals 
and medical centers to participate in a 
study of heart transplants. The study 
was to include all aspects of heart 
transplants including scientific, social, 
economic and ethical issues. This 
$1.5 million study was submitted to 
HCFA by the Battelle Center in Seat- 
tle in September 1984, and IS sched- 
uled for public release in early 1985. 
The hospitals which performed trans- 
plants in the study were Stanford Uni- 
versity, Medical College of Virginia 
and Richmond Vererans Adminisrra- 
tion Hospital, in Richmond, Virginia, 
Columbia-Presbyterian in New York 
and the Universities of Minnesota, 
Pittsburgh, and Arizona. 
The Office of Health Technology 
Assessment, a division of the National 
Center for Health Services Research, 
has been asked by HCFA to evaluate 
the safety and effectiveness of heart, 
pancreas and liver transplantation. 
The assessment of liver transplantion, 
requested by HCFA in August 1982, 
was finished in 1983. The report con. 
If there are insufficient re- 
sources to transplant all who 
can so benefit, selection from 
the medically suitable group 
should be based primarily on 
a first-come, first-served basis. 
cluded that liver transplant~tion was 
technically feasible. extremely cupen- 
sive and a very coniplicaied operation 
capable o f  extending the lives of  care- 
fully selected patienth with end stage 
liver disease. The report \sent on, 
however, to raise q u e s ~ i o m  ah(iut .se. 
lection mechanisms. orgm availahil- 
ity, costs. institutional c;lpahilities. 
and equality o f  access 
Based on this report, HljS  an- 
nounced that at this time the Adminis- 
tration supports federal recognition of 
liver transplantation :IS non.experi- 
mental f o r  children uith hiliary atre- 
sia and other rare c(ingenital abnor- 
malities. I t  has been reported that the 
Department of Defense will isme reg- 
ulations for its CHAMPUS program 
permitting reimbursement for liver 
transplantation. Some transplants are 
financed by federal health research 
funds through the NatlOnJl Institute 
of Health. NIH is financing heart 
transplants at Stanford and will con- 
tinue until 1987. Other federal agen. 
cies funding heart transplants include 
the Veterans Administration~s pro- 
gram at Richmond, Virginia. 
Medicare 
The Medicare program is one of a 
number of programs administered by 
the Health Care Financing Adminis- 
tration (HCFA). Medicare benefits are 
available to those 65 or over, those 
who are disabled, and those who are 
suffering from End-Stage Renal Dis- 
ease (ESRD). HCFA determines the 
procedures covered and the appropri- 
ate level of reimbursement. 
Presently the only major organ 
Frbruav 1385 21 
 transplants covered by Medicare are 
kidney transplants. Renal transplants 
and dialysis were included in the 
Medicare program under section 2291 
of Public Law 92-603, effective Octo- 
ber 30, 1972. This program has been 
successful from the point of view of 
improving access and providing 
health care to those suffering from 
ESRD, and has grown rapidly since 
1972. The number of beneficiaries 
has risen from 10,000 in 1974 to more 
than 65,000 in 1982, while the annual 
cost rose from $242 million in 1974 
to almost $2 billion in 1982, and a 
projected $5.5 billion for 90,000 pa- 
tients in 1995. 
A number of commentators have 
noted the disproportionate share of 
Medicare funds spent for ESRD recip- 
ients. For example, in 1980, ESRD 
beneficiaries were less than % of 1 
percent of total beneficiaries for Sup- 
plementary Medical Insurance 
(professional and ancillary services); 
but ESRD costs represented 5 percent 
of the total Medicare budget for these 
services. Another high figure for kid- 
ney program is the dialysis rate. The 
United States provides dialysis for pa- 
tients at a rate which far exceeds that 
of Europe and Israel. The United 
States dialysis rate is 204.7 per mil- 
lion. Of the countries studied, Israel 
has the next highest rate (144 per 
million) and France (123 per million) 
has the highest rate in Western Eu. 
rope. The dialysis rate in the United 
Kingdom is 52 per million. Among 
the states in the United States, the 
highest is the District of Columbia 
(983 per million) and the lowest is 
Wyoming (20 per million). 
Medicaid 
Medicare policy on acceptable proce- 
dures strongly affects policies of 
many states in the establishment and 
implementation of Medicaid stan- 
dards. The Medicaid program is a fed- 
eral/state program. While states are 
required to pay for a basic set of 
acute, out-patient and skilled nursing 
home services, other optional services 
can be added to the state program un- 
der the same federal-state cost sharing 
arrangements. Several groups of 
clients are covered by Medicaid, in- 
cluding the elderly, dependent chil- 
dren and their families, and the dis- 
abled. Also covered by many states 
are those who have spent a portion of 
22 
Table 
Screening Procedure 
All Candidates Referred to Transplant Hospitals 
J. 
J. 
Medical Screening 
Candidates who Meet  Objective Medical Criteria' 
I 
Ranking Process + 
Pool of Ranked Medically-Qualified Candidates' 
3s deiermined by physicians at the transplant hospitals 
*' ranked on first-come, first-served basis so that highest ranking candi- 
date who 'matches" first available donor organ gets it, unless lower 
ranking candidate is in immediate danger of death and first candidate has 
a reasonable chance of surviving to receive the next available donor organ 
(jumping the queue must be approved by a system-wide selection com- 
mittee with public representation). 
!OK .Vrdicmr F- Heallh Care 
their income on medical care or have 
'spent-down" and have become 
'medically indigent." 
The federal government will not 
fund heart and liver transplants 
through Medicare, but will pay the 
federal portion of Medicaid transplant 
coverage in states which choose to 
fund them. To learn more about Med- 
icaid-funded transplants, the Task 
Force carried out an informal survey 
of eleven states, including the contig- 
uous New England states (Connecti- 
cut, Rhode Island, Vermont, New 
Hampshire), and states in other re- 
gions (Arizona, California, Maryland, 
Michigan, New Jersey, New York, and 
Pennsylvania). Medicaid central of- 
fices in these states were asked if they 
had received any requests for liver, 
heart or heart/lung transplants, if re- 
quests had been approved, and if a 
prior authorization mechanism or 
case-management technique was used 
for these requests. If the respondent 
mentioned the Medicare criteria as 
part of explanation or rationale for 
state policy, this was also noted. 
Nine of the eleven states had at 
least one request, and eight had ap- 
proved at least one transplant. All 
three states receiving requests but not 
granting approvals cited the Medicare 
criteria in explaining their decision. 
Seven states had approved at least one 
liver transplant, five states had ap- 
proved at least one heart transplant 
and four states had approved at least 
one heart-lung transplant. All states 
but one which had approved at least 
one transplant had a prior authoriza- 
tion mechanism. This is not unusual 
because for many Medicaid-eligible 
patients, organ transplantation will be 
an out-of.state service which automat- 
ically requires prior authorization. 
Several states emphasized that recent 
transplants were exceptions and were 
not established state policy. Other 
states reported that transplants were 
the subject of ongoing discussion or 
that reimbursement arrangements for 
transplant limited the hospitals to the 
standard per diem rate for the stay. I n  
another state, liver transplants were 
being approved for biliary atresia 
only. Finally Medicaid may not be the 
only state program capable of cover- 
ing transplantation. One state re- 
 ported that two residents turned 
down by Medicaid received 3 trans- 
plant through the vocational rehabili- 
tation agency in the state. The Depan- 
ment of Welfare in this state paid for 
the hospitalization and related costs. 
The determination of need 
process is an appropriate one 
for required review and prior 
approval of this extreme and 
expensive technology because 
of the major impact it is likely 
to have on the health care sys- 
tem. 
- ~~ 
New England States. Of five other 
New England states, only Vermont at 
present has received no transplant re- 
quests. Two states, Maine and Con- 
necticut, have authorized transplants. 
Maine has authorized a heart trans- 
plant; Connecticut has authorized 3 
heart/lung transplant and three heart 
transplants. All  New England states 
contacted have staff working on trans- 
plant issues. 
Massachusetts. The Medicaid pro- 
gram in Massachusetts will pay for 
heart, heart-lung. and liver transplants 
for eligible patients. Potential recipi- 
ents must meet both federally.estab- 
lished Medicaid financial eligibility 
criteria, and medical criteria devel- 
oped by the Massachusetts Medicaid 
Review Committee to determine 
medical necessity. Financial eligibility 
criteria include provision for those 
who have “spent.down” by spending 
their income on medical expenses. 
Medicaid is the payor of last resort on 
these procedures. All available re- 
sources are applied to the cost of the 
procedure before Medicaid contrib- 
utes. 
Medical criteria for each type of 
transplant define the medical condi- 
tions and circumstances for which the 
procedure is appropriate. Examples 01 
these standards are age criteria, clini- 
cal diagnosis, and the presence of 
specific clinical signs. Based on the 
criteria, the Medical Review Commi- 
tee, a physician advisory group repre- 
senting a number of medical special. 
ties, makes case-by-case determina- 
tions of appropriateness. To allow 
time for the prior authorization proce- 
dures, requests for approval should 
be made 14 days prior to the need for 
surgery. In a medical emergency, re- 
view of the material can be com- 
pleted by central office staff within 2 
days. 
The Massachusetts Medicaid pro- 
gram has paid for several out-of-state 
transplants in the past, and following 
the implementation of organ trans- 
plant in-state, has approved payment 
for several in-state recipients. 
National Blue Cross and Blue 
Shield Policy 
Currently. the policies of “the Blues” 
vary by state. The plans closest to t h e  
major transplant centers have been 
compelled to address the ibsue to 3 
greater extent than the outlying plans. 
Although a few plans have tried t o  
provide coverage through innovauve 
methods, several have taken the posii- 
tion of addressing each transplant re- 
quest on an individual consideration 
basis. In a number of plans, no re- 
quests have been made to cover such 
services and, therefore, the need for 3 
specific policy statement has not been 
forced. 
Twenty plans have formal policies 
to pay for one or more of the types of 
transplants. All twenty plans cover 
liver transplants. Nineteen cover heart 
transplants as well. At least one of  the 
twenty covers all organ transplants. 
Ten additional plans have paid one o r  
more cases based on an administra- 
tive decision, and ten plans have 
specifically denied claims. Many 
plans have exclusions in their cow 
tracts for experimental/investigational 
procedures. 
Among the New England states, the 
policy varies widely: 
1 .  Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
of Rhodr Islatid is offering a rider 
to its current contracts which 
would cover all investigational 
transplant procedures. They rec- 
ognize heart, liver, heart-lung, 
pancreas, and small intestine 
transplants as coverable. 
2. BIue Cross of Vermont, Blue 
Cross/Blue Shield of New Hamp- 
shire and Blue Cros/Blue Shield 
of Maine have had a limited num. 
ber of requests for coverage. The 
number of subscribers in these 
plans has been too small to un- 
derwrite such expensive surgery 
and the plans are looking for 
ways to put coverage in place 
without excessive cost. A sugges. 
tion under discussion in Vermont 
is a statewide insurance pool to 
share the risks. Blue Cross/Blue 
Shield of New Hampshire will 
cover liver, heart, heart/lung and 
pancreas transplants as of June 1 ,  
1984. Blue Cross/Blue Shield of 
Maine has obtained re-insurance 
for transplant and expects to offer 
coverage as of January 1985. 
3. Blue CrosslRltre Shield oJ 
Cowrecticrrt provides coverage 
for heart, liver and heart-lung 
transplants and has paid for sev- 
eral transplants. They are  pres- 
ently completing a study which 
will assist them i n  develop~ng 3 
more complete transplant policy. 
Most plans, whether or not they 
have developed 3 policy, are experi- 
encing frustration in attempting to ad- 
dress the issue on a local level. Issues 
such as clinical indications for the 
various types of transplants. viable 
funding mechanisms, the optimal 
number of transplant centers. and the 
criteria for their certification, remain 
unanswered. 
Blue Cross/Blue Shield in 
Massachusetts 
Blue Cross and Blue Shield o f  Massa. 
chusetts provide coverage h r  medical 
procedures which are considrred 
“generally accepted.” The corpora- 
tions rely on the advice of the Inter- 
specialty Medical Advisory Committee 
(IMAC) for a determination of which 
procedures meet the established cri- 
teria for general acceptability. 
Established in 1941 to advise the 
Board of Directors on medical issues, 
]MAC is comprised of 38 professional 
physician and paramedical members, 
representing over 26 medical and sur- 
gical specialties.. Sub-committees for 
each specialty provide IMAC with an 
advisory resource of over 300 medical 
and paramedical professionals 
throughout the state. 
Decisions of IMAC do not in and of 
 themselves constitute Blue Cross and 
Blue Shield policy changes. The Cen- 
tral Professional Service Committee 
(CPSC), a bylaw committee of the 
Blue Shield Board of Directors, must 
approve IMAC recommendations for 
conformity to “Generally Accepted 
~~ ~ 
If more than one hospital is 
granted a certificate of need 
to do heart or liver transplan- 
tation, all hospitals so in- 
volved should be required to 
coordinate services in a way 
that comes as close as possible 
to a single, integrated medical 
service. 
Guidelines” established for surgical 
and medical procedures. A generally 
accepted surgical or medical proce- 
dure is defined as a procedure which: 
a) has completed the research or 
experimental stage o f  develop- 
ment; 
b) does not involve, as an inte- 
gral part of the procedure, the 
use of any drug. substance, or  de-  
vice which ha5 not been released 
by the Food and Drug Adminis- 
tration or  other gowrnmental li- 
censing agrncics for general use 
by qualified physicians; 
c )  is in genecil use For patient 
care by physicians qualified to 
perform the proccclure; 
d )  is of demonstrated value for 
the diagnosis or treatment of an 
illness. injury. or hodily function. 
Using these review procedures, the 
corporations approved corneal trans. 
plants in the 1950s, kidney transplants 
in the 1960s and, in 1980, certain 
hone marrow transplants. Heart trans- 
plants were first reviewed by IMAC in 
I‘)-- and liver transplants were con- 
sidered in 1978. At that time IMAC 
recommended, and CPSC concurred, 
that neither procediire met the crite- 
ri:c for “generally accepted.’’ Liver 
transplants had another review in Sep- 
tember and November, 1982, but 
IMAC voted in November that it was 
not a generally accepted procedure. 
This recommendation Was upheld by 
CPSC in February. 1983. Then, in 
24 Lax, .Vrdiciirr C- Healrh Care 
July, 1983, IMAC reviewed heart 
transplantation and the following vote 
to defer final approval of heart trans- 
plants was taken: 
Motion was made and sec- 
onded that the procedure, Heart 
Transplantation, appears to be a 
generally accepted procedure. 
However, because the procedure 
requires the use of a non FDA 
approoed drug, Cyclosporin A, 
the Committee recommends de- 
ferral of Jiual approval at the 
preseut time. (20 yeas, 4 nays, 1 
abstention.) 
Cyclosporin A received FDA ap- 
proval on November 14, 1983. Liver, 
heart and heart-lung transplants were 
considered again by IMAC in January, 
1984, and by CPSC in February, 1984. 
Both groups voted that these three 
transplants were now generally ac- 
cepted. 
In response to public pressure, in 
August of 1983, Blue Cross and Blue 
Shield of Massachusetts announced a 
program for insuring the costs of 
liver, heart and heart-lung transplants, 
called the Transplant Insurance Pro- 
gram (TIP). It was a stand-alone pro- 
gram that provided its own level of 
benefits, rather than adding to exist- 
ing basic Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
coverage. 
Currerzt Po/~cJ? Massachusetts Blue 
Cross and Blue Shield, as of February 
1. 198-+, will pay for heart, liver and 
heart.lung transplants as part of the 
regular benefit package rather than 
under the Transplant Insurance Plan. 
The coverage will cost $24 a year for 
a family, about $10 million total. This 
is about onepercent of the auerage 
sta leu ‘ide f a  m ily prem iu m. 1 n 1 986 
the cost will increase to $35.4 mil- 
lion. The Transplant Insurance Plan 
will continue to be offered by Blue 
Cross and Blue Shield and may be at- 
tractive to small employee groups 
since it is “community-rated” rather 
than “experience.rated” and thus 
more favorably priced. 
Commerc ia l  Insurance 
Over three-fourths of the 30 major 
commercial health insurers will pay 
for heart or liver transplants under 
their group major medical health 
plans. An informal survey prepared by 
the Health Insurance Association of 
America in June of I983 showed that 
82 percent of the companies were 
willing to pay for liver transplants and 
85 percent were willing to pay for 
heart transplants. In covering these 
procedures, reimbursement by many 
insurance companies will depend on 
compliance with certain criteria. Ex- 
amples of conditions and questioris 
asked by many carriers include: 
0 Is the procedure medically 
necessary? 
0 Have all other conventional 
methods of treatment been 
tried? 
Is the patient’s condition life- 
threatening? 
Is the procedure safe and ef- 
fective? 
0 Has the policy holder re- 
quested coverage for this pro- 
cedure? 
In addition, some policy holders have 
contracts which specifically exclude 
certain procedures. 
New medical procedures are reim- 
bursed by commercial insurers after a 
study of safety and effectiveness. 
Sources of information used by insur- 
ance companies include the medical 
profession, specialty medical associa- 
tions, state or national medical socie- 
ties, new research studies, articles in 
medical journals, and government re- 
ports. If  the procedure is controver- 
sial or  has not been proven safe and 
effective, a company may decide 
against reimbursement. Officials of 
the Health Insurance Association of 
America say an industry-wide decision 
to cover transplants could come 
within one  year. 
Representative Policies from 
Other Countries 
Sweden: Heart and liver transplants 
are not done in Sweden, but Swedish 
citizens have received transplants in 
England. The procedures are ap- 
proved individually, and are paid for 
by the Swedish County councils. 
England: Heart, liver, and a limited 
number of heartllung transplants are 
performed in England. One  center for 
liver transplant and two for heart 
transplant are funded by the National 
 Health Service. T h e  Hea l th  Service re- 
cen t ly  announced p lans  t o  p rov ide  a 
fur ther  year's support for  t h e  t w o  
hear t  t ransplant  centers .  T h i s  decision 
was based  on t h e  in t e r im  report  of  a 
research s tudy  group sponsored by 
t h e  Depar tmen t  of Health a n d  Social 
Security. T h e  final r epor t  is due a t  t h e  
end of  1983. 
Nefherlarzds: Liver, bu t  no t  hear t  
transplants, are pe r fo rmed  it1 Ho l l and .  
Permission fo r  e s t ab l i shmen t  of  t h e  
liver t ransplant  cen te r  in  Gron igen  
was g ran ted  b y  t h e  gove rnmen t  a n d  
f inanced  with funds  from private  in -  
surance compan ies .  
ada  a r e  fimnced by t h e  indivitlual 
provincial  heal th  p l ans  a n d  v a n  ac -  
c o r d i n g  t o  t h e  comprehens ive  na tu re  
of  e a c h  p l an .  Kidney t ransplants  a r e  
rout inely cove red .  Heart, liver ancl 
hea r t - lung  t ransplants  3rc consirlerrcl 
more expe r imen ta l  a n d  can  be cov- 
ered th rough  prior authorizst ion and 
special  appl icat ion ro rhe  Minisrry of 
Heal th .  Pat ients  a r e  referred at  t h e  
r ecommenda t ion  of t h e  a t t end ing  
physician a n d  referrals may  inc lude  
o u t  of province a n d  United States lo- 
cat ions.  Heart  a n d  liver t ransplants  a r e  
pe r fo rmed  i n  London ,  Onra r io  a n d  
Montreal ,  Q u e b e c .  
Canada: Organ  t ransplants  i n  Can-  
References 
1 .  PRESIDENTS COMMl>hlON FOR l -HE 
STUDY OF ETHICAL PROBLEM> I N  MEDICINE 
AND BIOMEOICAL ND BEHAWORAL RESEARCH, 
SECURING ACCESS TO HEALIH CARE: THE 
ETHICAL IMPLICATIONS OF DIFFERENCES I N  
THE AVAILABILITY OF HEAI.+H SERVICES (US. 
Gov't Printing Ofc., Washington. D.C.) 
(vol. 1 1983) at 5 [hereinafter referred ro 
2. Final Repon of the Task Force on 
Liver Transplantarion in Massachusetts (Fi. 
neberg Report) (May 1983) at 40. 
3. SECURING ACCESS, supra note 1 ,  at 25. 
4. Coordinating Council, End Stage 
Renal Disease Network p28, Annual Re- 
pon to the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services for Calendar Year 1982 (July 1 .  
1983). 
5. Krakauer, H., et ai., Tbe Recei~t US. 
Eqerience in the Trearmrnr ofEnd-Stage 
Renal Disease by Dialysis and Transplan- 
Iation. NEW ENGLAND JOURNAL OF MEDICINE 
308(26): 1558-63 Oune 30, 1983). 
6. Personal communication with N.L. 
Tilney. 
7 Griepp, R.N., A Decade of Human 
Heart Transplantation. TRANSPIANTATION 
8~ Shumxvay, N.E., Cardiac Replace- 
as SECIJRrNG ACCf>s]. 
PROCEEDINGS 9: 265-91 (1979). 
ment iii Prrspectiw, HEART RAN>PIANTA. 
TlON 3: 3-5 (1983). 
Cardiac Transplantation. TRAN~PLANTA. 
T I O N  PYOCEEDINIA 15: 1221-21 (1983). 
didatafor Cardiac Transplanration, 
HEART RANSPIANTATION 3: 65-69 (1983). 
tation m Perspective for the Future: Sur- 
viizal, Complications, Rehabilitation and 
CULAR SIIRGERY 83: 168-77 (1982). 
12. Reitz, B.A.. Stinson, E.B.. Cardiac 
Transplantation 1982, JOURNAL ob THE 
AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION 248(10): 
1225-27 (September 10. 1982). 
13. Cardiac Homotraiisplairtatioii, 
CMRENT PROBLEM> I N  S ~ ' R G E R Y .  16 3 
( 39793. 
9. Shumway. N.E.. Recent Advances in 
10. Thompson, M.E., Selection of Can- 
11. Pennock, el al., Cardiac Transplan 
COS/,JOURNAL OF THORACIC A N U  CARDIOVAS- 
li Reilz, B.A., Heart-Lung Transpimi- 
tation: A Reideu'. HEART w.wm"A'i  10% 
1: 8 (1982). 
15 .  Moore. F.D., e t a / . ,  Experimental 
Whole Organ Traiisplatitatio~r oftbe Lic'er 
and Spleeli, ANNALI O F  S1:RGFRY 152: 37i- 
87 (1960). 
( 1983). 
OF LlvEa TKANbPlANrArIoN (U.S .  GOV'I  
Printing Ofc., Washington, D.C.) (1983). 
18. Starzl. T., el a / . ,  Eimlulioii ofLitwr 
Transplantation, HEPATOLOGY 2: 6 14-36 
( 1982). 
sociared Chronic Nephropathj, NEW ENG 
705 (September 13, 1981). 
19. Myers, B.D., el a/., CJs/osporille-As- 
LAND JOURNAL O F  MEDICINE 311(11): 699- 
20. G.J. ANNAS. L.H. GIANT%, B KATZ, 
THE RICHTI OF DOCTORS. Nc.RSEb. AND AL- 
LIED HEALTH PROFESIONAL~ (Ballingrr 
Books, Cambridge. Mass.) (1981) a1 22+ 
25. 
21. Commonwealth v. Golston, 366 
N.E.2d 74.i (Mass. 1977), cert. denied, i 3 i  
U.S. 1039 (1978). Set' PRESIDENTS COMMIh. 
SlOV FOR THE STUDY OF ETHICAL PROBLEMS 
I N  MEDICINE AND BIOMEOICAL A N 0  BEHAV 
IOKAI. RE~EARCH, DEFINING DEATII ( U  S. 
Gov't Printing Ofc., Washington. D C 1 
(1981) at 136-38. 
22. Annas, G.J., LiJe, Liberty, and the 
Pursuit of Organ Sales. H A ~ T I N G ~  CENTEH 
REPORT l i ( 1 ) :  22-23 (February 1984). 
23. Much of this section relies on idras 
in or derived from the work of Professor 
Guido Calabresi of Yale Law School, espe. 
cially from G. CALABRESI, P. Boseirr ,  
TRAGIC HOICE> (Norton, New York, N.Y.) 
(1978) 
24. Fletcher, J.+ Our Shameful Waste 01 
Human Tissue, in THE RELIGIOCS SITUA 
T I O N  (D.R. Cutler. ed.)  (Beacon Press, 
Boston, Mass.) (1969) at 223-52. 
25. R Fox, J .  SWAZEY, THE COURAGE TO 
FAIL (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 
111.) (1974) at 232. 
26. Sanders, D., Dukeminier. J., Medi- 
cal Advance and Legal Lag: Hemodialysis 
and Kidnej' Transplantation UCLA LAW 
REVIEW 15(1): 357 (1968). 
2 l  Rerrig. R.A., Tbe Policy Debate on 
Patient Care Financing for Victims of 
End-Stage Renal Disease, LAW B CoNrEu. 
PORARY PROBLEMS 40(4): 1% (Autumn 
1976). 
28. TRAGIC HOICE>, supra note 23. 
29 SECURIVG ACCESS, supra note 1. at 
30. TRAGIC HOICES, supra note 23 
31. Bayer. R..lusrice and ffealtb Care 
in an Era of Cost Containment. AllOCating 
Scarce .tfedical Resources, SOCIAI. REsPON- 
$iim.In 9: 37-52 (198.1). See Annas. G.J.. 
Allocation ofArtijicia1 Hearts in r h r  Year 
2002: Minerva v. National Health Agency, 
25. 
AMERICAN JOURNAL O F LAW & MEDICINE 
59-76 (Spring 1977). 
32. Commentary: UKL Poor Record in 
Treatment ofKenal Failure, LANCET, p. 53 
uury 7 ,  1984). 
33. A 1969 study of the criteria em-  
ployed by kidney dialysis centcra in the 
United Srates found that the eight must 
frequently employed criteria were: ( 1 )  
willingness to cooperate in ireatmeni rrgi- 
men (86 percent): (2) medical suitability 
(79 percent); ( 3 )  absence of orhrr disa- 
bling disease (69 percent); (4) intelli- 
gence to understand trratnient ( 3 i  per- 
cent). ( 5 )  likelihood of v o c x i o n ~ l  rehahil- 
itatioii (32 percent); (6 )  age (20 percent). 
(71 primacy of application for available va- 
cancy (26 percent), and ( 8 )  psychiatric 
evaluation (25 percent). FOS & SWAZEY, su- 
pra nore 25, at 230. The family question, 
as put 10 candidates at Stanford's heart 
transplantation center has been, "Does the 
patient have a strong supponive family 
willing and able to withstand the appre- 
hension, anxiety. fear, wailing. fatigue. 
sepantion. euphoria. disappointmenr. and 
grief that the different phases vf cardiac 
transpllntation entail? Does the family 
have enough strength to provide continu- 
ing support t o  the patient a\ well as i o  
34. Most. hut not all. liver rransplanr 
programs exclude active alcoholics from 
considerarion for liver rransplantatrwi The 
Boston Center for Liver Transplsnration. 
for example. excludes alcolir~lics who have 
not abstained for less than two yean.  a n d  
more generally excludes "acrivr drug or 
alcohol" users. The Brigham and Wunien's 
Hospital's Guidelines for Cardiac Trans- 
plantarion are somewhar less explicit. ask- 
ing referring physicians to consider "a his- 
tory of alcohol or drug abuse, or mental 
illness thar would complicate pmt-trans- 
plantation followup" as a "conrraindicarion 
to cardiac transplanration." The Task Force 
concluded that blanker exclusions. l ike  
thar of rbe Liver Center, are arbitran and 
tend to reinforce negative and destructive 
societal stereorypes. Accordingly. such in. 
dividuals should not be  per se excluded 
from screening if they want a transplant. 
On  the other hand, it is reasonable and 
proper 10 consider the impact of the pa- 
tient's substance abuse or mental illness 
on the  probability of successfully follow- 
Febrirar). 1985 25 
 ing an immunosuppression regimen and 
being physically rehahilitated following 
transplant. Although such a judgment will 
also have large suhjecrive elements, i t  is 
here. rather than on the disease of suh- 
stance ahuse itself, tliat tlie decision 
should focus. 
ogy and the liiei~itahilitj of Xesource Allo- 
cation and Katioiriiig Decisioirs, Part 11. 
 ION 249(16): 2208-17 (April 22/29, 
1983). 
35. Evans, R . W ,  Healtb Care Tecbnol- 
JOI'KNAI. OF THE AMERICAN MEIMCAI. A ~ S O C I A  
36. Id. 
37. The New England Organ Bmk is in 
the  process of changing its policy. hut the 
following summarizes what it was. One of 
the two kidneys ~ O K S  t o  the  regional cen. 
ter that covers the hospital that procured it 
and the kidney is u.wd at the hospital's 
discretion. The other is distributed 011 rhe 
hasis of matching. Kidney matching is gen- 
erally done on tlie bisis of  tissue compati. 
hility to minimize the prohahility of rejec- 
tion. Most importantly, the recipient must 
h e  crossmatch negative: i.e.. there must 
not h e  a reaction when the recipient's 
bloud is mixed with the white hlood cells 
of the donor. If there is, there is likely to 
he 3 severe and early rejection of the kid- 
ney. I f  there is not, 3 patient in immediate 
need of a kidney may obtain one on this 
hasis alone. 
More sophisticated immunological tests 
are usually performed, however. so that 
the kidney can go to the matching individ- 
ual with the luii.rstprohahiliiy of ever ob. 
taining 3 kidney The quest is t o  determine 
the recipient's allergic status t o  foreign 
suhstances, like hlood and kidneys. The 
mure highly allergic a patient is, tlie more 
difficult it will he t o  find the patient a suit- 
;ihlr kidney. PJSI h l o d  transfusions in 
crease the patient's allergic reaction status, 
3s. of  course. do prior transplants The pa- 
tient's allergic status is "panel rractivity'. 
and is expressed as a percentage, with 100 
pcrcent bring the most allergic. The p n r l  
rc;iclivity is determined by tlie presence of 
:tniihodies to 160 antigens. common in 
North American man. The niorr h1i)iid 
used. the higher pe rcen tqy  of antibodies 
t o  the 160 antigen\. One-hundred percent 
reactivity me3115 thai the  patient has 3ntI~ 
hodies to all aniigenr. 
Patients with high percentages get pref. 
erence; if prrcrntagrs  are equal, the bank 
goes to the next two tissue matching tesm 
HLA.DR matching and no incornpatihilit:- 
for IILA-A, B aiitigens. The patient scoring 
the highr\t match on  these te 
receive the kidney. I n  the unlikely event 
that two o r  more patients still score [he 
same. hohpiwls with the hetter record o f  
o rgm procurement are given priorit! And 
i f  710 patient in the region scores well 
enough to justify transplantation. the organ 
is referred to a national pool. These gen-  
eral criteria were supplied by the New 
England Organ Bank, whose priorities for 
kidney distrihution of the second kidney 
are 1) medically urgent; 2) sensitized p- 
tient, negative crossmatches; 50-100 per- 
cent panel reactivity for greater than 3 
months; 3)  full house HLA.DR match; 4) 
no incompatahility for HLA-A, B antigens; 
5) NEOB institutional net credit rating; 
and 6) export of kidney to National Net- 
work. 
Distribution systems for livers and 
hearts are much less sophisticated. Patient 
blood type and age/weight factors are first 
priorities. Hearts are generally cross- 
matched, while livers are not. After these 
criteria are met. medical urgency is usuallv 
72 hours for kidneys) after removal from 
the donor, there are much Stricter geo- 
graphic and temporal constraints on disiri~ 
bution. See generally Organ Transplants: 
Hearings Before the Subcommittee on In- 
vestigations and Ouersigbr, House Com- 
mittee on Science And Technology, 97th 
Cong., 1st Sess. (April 13, 14, 27, 1983). 
With artificial organs. cross-mdtching 
will no longer he an issue, and w e  will 
have to directly confront distribution of re- 
placement organs on more exclusively 
nonmedical  terms. See. e.P. Annas. SliDra 
the primary priority. Because hearts and . note 31. 
livers survive less than twelve hours (vs. 
I
To Contributors 
Law, Medicine G Health Care welcomes original manuscripts dealing 
with current or emerging problems in health law or medicolegal 
relations. Acceptable subject areas include: health law and policy; 
legal aspects of medical practice; medical malpractice; nursing law 
and ethics; compensation medicine; risk management; or any other 
interrelationship between law, medicine, and health care. 
copies are required. Length should not exceed thirty typewritten 
pages, including footnotes. Footnotes should also be typed double- 
spaced, numbered consecutively, and placed at the end of the text. All 
legal footnotes should conform to A Uniform Spfem of Citation, 
published by the Harvard Law Review Association. A short 
biographical statement should accompany the manuscript. 
Law, Medicine &Health Care also welcomes letters-to-the-editors, 
commentaries, short book reviews, and extended book review essays. 
Style sheets are available upon request. Manuscripts and inquiries 
should be directedxo: 
Manuscripts should be typed double-spaced on 8% X 11 paper. Two 
Betty G. Barrer 
Law, Medicine G Health Care 
American Society of Law & Medicine 
765 Commonwealth Avenue 
Boston, MA 02215 
Manuscripts will be acknowledged within one week of their receipt. 
All manuscripts are peer-reviewed. Material accepted for publication 
becomes the property of the American Society of Law & Medicine. 
Upon request, articles not selected for publication will be returned. 
No compensation is paid for articles published. 
26 Law. .Wcdiciire 6- Health Cure 
