Original Research
http://www.ve.org.za doi:10.4102/ve.v32i1.487
Gender representation in Christian book covers:
 A case study
Authors: 
Stella Viljoen1
Leandra Koenig-Visagie2
Affiliations:
1Department of Visual Arts, 
Stellenbosch University, 
South Africa
2Department of 
Communication Science, 
University of South Africa, 
South Africa
Correspondence to: 
Leandra Koenig-Visagie
Email:
kvisalh@unisa.ac.za
Postal address: 
PO Box 392, UNISA 0003, 
South Africa
Dates:
Received: 06 Dec. 2010
Accepted: 04 Feb. 2011
Published: 01 Apr. 2011
How to cite this article:
Viljoen, S. & KoenigVisagie,
L.H.,  2011, 
‘Gender representation 
in Christian book covers: 
A case study’, Verbum et 
Ecclesia 32(1), Art. #487, 
9 pages. doi:10.4102/
ve.v32i1.487
In this article, we described how gender is represented on two Christian book covers by 
popular author, John Eldredge, namely Wild at Heart. Discovering the Secret to a Man’s Soul 
(2001) and Captivating. Unveiling the Mystery of a Woman’s Soul (2005). Through semiotic visual 
analysis, we explored how the active male–passive female opposition functions on these 
covers. This opposition is constructed by visually associating the male figure on the cover 
of Wild at Heart with active outdoor adventurism and the female figure on Captivating with 
passive situatedness in nature. The titles of the two books also contribute to positioning the 
male as active and the female as passive. We further investigated how certain myths are created 
on these covers in support of an active male–passive female opposition and its underlying 
ideologies. The cover of Wild at Heart creates and also taps into the colonial myth of conquest. 
The cover of Captivating creates and taps into the myth of the fairytale and visually represents 
the female figure in a whimsical manner, thus constructing her as a representation of the 
spiritual or divine. The article questioned the role this information design plays in prescribing 
the expectations of gendered identity.
Introduction
In 2001, pop-psychology best-selling Christian author, John Eldredge, published his answer to 
what secular and Christian theorists alike had deemed a crisis in Western masculine identity. The 
book, Wild at Heart. Discovering the Secret to a Man’s Soul, instantly became a best-seller with about 
3 million copies sold world-wide (Hagenau 2009). The book has been translated into 16 languages 
and made the Publisher’s Weekly best-seller list for four consecutive years. Writer for the popular 
Christian magazine, Christianity Today, Douglas LeBlanc (2004:34) states that, ‘Eldredge… [is] 
leading a small revolution in Christian spirituality.’1 
John Eldredge, born 06 June 1960, is an author, counsellor and lecturer who, after a brief encounter 
with Eastern mysticism, Lao-Tzu and New Age spirituality, became a Christian. He was 
apparently inspired by the writings of the renowned Swiss apologist, Francis Schaeffer, whose 
philosophical musings led Eldredge to commit himself to the Christian faith. So compelled was 
Eldredge by Christianity, that he eventually got a master’s degree in counselling and practiced as 
a Christian counsellor in Colorado Springs before working for Focus on the Family, the American 
evangelical nonprofit organisation founded in 1977 by James Dobson. In July 2000, Eldredge 
left Focus on the Family to launch Ransomed Heart Ministries, a ministry devoted to furthering 
what he termed the sacred romance between God and man, a relationship apparently ‘lost and 
shrouded by religion’ (Ransomed Heart Ministries 2009:1 of 2). Since then John Eldredge (as well 
as his wife, Stasi Eldredge) has become fuel for the recent flame of what might be termed popChristianity
or the on-going commercialisation of faith.
Wild at Heart primarily centres on the invitation that Eldredge extends to all Christian men to 
‘recover their masculine heart, defined in the image of a passionate God’ (from the back cover, 
see image 2). In other words, it addresses the role of masculinity in contemporary evangelical 
Christian culture. In spite of harsh criticism from many who felt uncomfortable with Eldredge’s 
easy reductionism and determined essentialism he joined forces with his wife to, in 2005, bring 
out a companion version to Wild at Heart entitled, Captivating. Unveiling the Mystery of a Woman’s 
Soul. As the title suggests, this book concerns the captivating quality or nature of the feminine. 
It is difficult to explain the basic premises of these books without creating a straw man, but one 
might say that Eldredge attempts to ‘discover the secret of a man [or woman’s] soul’ as proffered 
by the subtitle to Wild at Heart. Simply put, Eldredge (on the back cover of Wild at Heart) suggests 
that the secret to a man’s soul is that he desires a battle to fight and the secret to a woman’s soul 
is that she desires to be desirable. Simple as that.
1.It is questionable whether this success is as a result of effective marketing or theological merit, as Brynn Camery-Hoggatt and 
NelsonMunn (2005:24) points out: ’Eldredge’s immense popularity ... must not be allowed to disguise the fact that his suggestions are 
often incongruent with the teachings of Jesus’. Blogger, Randy Brandt (2003) says that Eldredge is propagating a theologically suspect 
stream of thought called Open Theism, a movement which is known for denying God’s omniscience, omnipotence and sovereignty, 
ultimately resulting in the humanising of God.
Page 1 of 9
© 2011. The Authors.
Licensee: OpenJournals
Publishing. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.
 Original Research
http://www.ve.org.za doi:10.4102/ve.v32i1.487
This article is concerned with the Eldredges’ propensity 
to exaggerate and hype gendered notions of ‘calling’ 
or universal purpose. Critical reviewer, Colleen Carrol 
Campbell (2007:51), states that ‘the Eldredges devote most of 
their book [Captivating] to explaining and defending intrinsic 
differences between the sexes …’. Specifically, we would like 
to address the covers of the two books in question, namely 
Wild at Heart and Captivating. The case of these covers is 
relevant, because not much is available in academic literature 
about Wild at Heart and even less about Captivating.2 No 
critique or reading of these covers appears in the literature 
dealing with the books and it is this gap in available research 
which this article seeks to fill.
Despite the fact that these books were published in 2001 and 
2005, they still spark debate and receive reviews even in 2010. 
The books’ longevity in terms of eliciting critical attention, 
as well as the prolific sales figures they have reached 
internationally, justifies an investigation of this nature. 
Susan Hagenau (2009), brand manager for Thomas Nelson, 
publisher of Wild at Heart and Captivating, confidently 
declares that both books ‘are still selling well’. Indeed, 
both books remain to date an unavoidable presence on the 
contemporary Christian literary landscape.
Methods and theory
The visuality of Christian culture is worthy of analysis, not 
least because Christian visual media must influence Christian 
culture and not just the other way around. For this reason, 
the manner in which beliefs about gendered sex roles are 
communicated through the visual material promoting itself 
as ‘Christian’ in the hegemonic sense demands analysis from 
a secular (feminist) perspective. As early as 1935, Walter 
Benjamin, famously reflected on the feeling of strangeness 
that overcomes the actor before the camera and that this 
sense of estrangement is akin to that felt by anybody looking 
into the (now Lacanian) mirror. Benjamin (1935:9) mooted 
that through technology the reflected image has become 
separable, transportable. In answer to the question of where 
this image is transported, he comments, ‘Before the public’ 
(Benjamin 1935:9). The image reflected back to the viewer 
from a book cover is surely no different. It is a code that 
speaks to the viewer about their own identity and suggests 
to them how this may be performed in the public sphere.
According to Stuart Hall’s (1980) encoding/decoding 
communication model various phases or ‘moments’ can be 
identified in the process of communication. Chandler (1994) 
draws our attention to the fact that further elaboration on 
these ‘moments’ can be found in John Corner’s (1983) three 
definitions of the phases of encoding and decoding. The 
first phase is the encoding phase or the moment of writing. 
According to Corner (1983:266), this first phase is informed by 
‘the institutional and organizational practices of production, 
governed by media policies and by the professional and 
2.Wild at Heart does, however, spark fervent criticism amongst bloggers and book 
reviewers (cf. Brandt 2003, LeBlanc 2004, Challies 2004 & 2005; Winslow 2007, 
O’Brien 2008; Haddad 2009; Wingerd n.d.). Captivating enjoys notably less attention 
from these spheres as can be seen in the smaller number of blog-posts and book 
reviews attributed to Captivating (cf. Challies 2005, Tennant 2006, Campbell 2007).
medium-related conventions of language and image use.’ 
The second phase is identified as ‘the moment of the “text” 
itself’ and is, for Corner (1983:267), ‘the particular symbolic 
construction, arrangement and perhaps performance which 
is the product of media skills and technical and cultural 
practices.’ The moment of the test represents the form and 
content of the communication. Finally, the third phase, the 
moment of decoding is defined as the moment of reception 
or consumption of communication by readers, viewers or 
any audiences, who actively decode messages as opposed 
to merely passively receiving them. According to Corner 
1983:267) this phase entails ‘the practices by which the 
reader/hearer/viewer, drawing on the particular linguistic 
and cultural competencies available and apparently 
appropriate, “makes sense” of, and realizes into coherent 
meaning’ the communication, its form and its message. 
According to Chandler (Chandler 1994), Hall (1980:128) 
also makes reference to various ‘linked but distinctive 
moments - production, circulation, distribution/consumption, 
reproduction’, which form part of what Hall theorises as the 
communication circuit.
We are concerned with the encoding and decoding of the 
semiotic images used in the design of the two book covers, 
but hope to treat these as fluid and acquiescent within our 
hypothetical matrix of meaning. It is our belief that visual 
representation is a means of revealing constructs of identity 
in terms of their performativity and we hope to demonstrate 
this through our discussion of the images used to sell these 
books.
Publishers, editors and media theorists alike agree that the 
cover art on books is imperative in procuring those allimportant
impulse buys. Malcolm Muggeridge famously 
proclaimed the Time cover spot as ‘post-Christendom’s most 
notable stain-glassed window’, indicating that in the mediascape
of impetuous consumerism, covers communicate the 
ideological brand of the author. For those of us researching 
visual media, book covers implicate the author in a semiotic 
language or dialect that betrays his or her commitment to 
a certain set of visual ideologies or tropes. Within gender 
studies, book covers may be seen as referents to the gendered 
ideals of the author just as glossy men’s magazine covers, for 
instance, project the objectifying ‘body fascism’ (Nead 1992) 
that is the mainstay of these publications. Book covers are, 
thus, as important as codes of visual ideology as magazine 
covers and require critical problematising and demystifying. 
In that vein, we hope to analyse the covers of both Wild at 
Heart and Captivating.
It is noteworthy, that the covers have never changed since 
they were first published, indicating that the authors and 
publishers feel content with the manner in which the cover 
art represented the contents or ‘message’ of the books. 
Hagenau (2009) describes the creative process around these 
covers as follows:
As far as the imagery on the covers, the designers read the 
manuscript and covers are created from the imagery that comes 
to mind when reading and what appeals to the author and his 
audience.
(Hagenau 2009)
Page 2 of 9
 Original Research
http://www.ve.org.za doi:10.4102/ve.v32i1.487
As, mentioned before, the publishers feel that the books are 
still selling well and that there is thus no need for redesign 
of the covers or re-branding of the books (Hagenau 2009). 
The covers of Wild at Heart and Captivating have, therefore, to 
some degree become iconic of the Eldredges’ ideas regarding 
what it means to be either a man or a woman in Christian 
culture.
The primary fault that theorists and bloggers alike seem to 
find with both texts is the shaky theology employed by the 
Eldredges3. It seems fair to say the argument of either book 
is supported by popular media myths and fairytales rather 
than theological discourse. The books are also frequently 
criticised for their simplistic view on gender roles. Authors 
Sally Gallagher and Sabrina Wood (2005:157) state that; ‘[Wild 
at Heart] places a non-negotiable and dimorphous gender 
identity at the centre of the story.’ Similarly, Brynn CameryHoggatt
and Nelson Munn (2005:24) note that, ‘Eldredge’s 
gender stereotypes present masculinity and femininity in a 
way that is incomplete, culturally dictated, and old-fashioned.’
Based on the previous discussion, this article has the 
following aims: Firstly, to describe how the Eldredges’ ideas 
translate into visual terms. Secondly, to describe how gender 
is represented on these covers and how the covers construct 
gendered Christian identity and thirdly, to investigate 
whether the covers participate in the propagation of gendered 
stereotypes found in mainstream, Christian culture. In order 
to address the above aims we employed an integrated 
semiotic analysis and discussion of the two book covers 
from within a Barthesian tradition, based on a description of 
connotations of signs, the construction of mythic meaning, 
as well as created and supported ideologies (Barthes 1972 & 
1979). Specific denotative descriptions of the signs present on 
these covers are, where they are not discussed in conjunction 
with connotative meaning, generally omitted for the sake of 
remaining concise.
We adhered to a basic Barthesian semiotic analysis, focusing 
on how meaning is constructed through signs and their 
various combinations, the connotations these hold from our 
social experiences and the way in which ‘[m]yth takes hold of 
an existing sign and makes it function as a signifier on another 
level’ (Bignell 2002:17). Myth, in Barthes’ (1972:129) terms, 
makes socially and culturally determined and constructed 
messages appear common-sense and natural. Myth is thus 
a distortion of reality, but nevertheless hides nothing, 
as its function is to obscure (Barthes 1972:121). Barthes 
(1972:109) also declares that: ‘Myth is a type of speech’. In 
our subsequent analysis, we considered how the two covers 
construct meaning and produce their own mythic language 
or way of talking about Christian gender. We also explored the 
ideological implications thereof.
Discussion
Wild at Heart
‘The stallions hang out in bars; the geldings hang out in 
church’ (David Murrow, as quoted in O’Brien 2008:49).
3.For summaries of the theological concerns about the books see Wingerd (n.d.), 
Winslow (2007), Camery-Hoggatt and Munn (2005) and Challies (2005).
The front cover of Wild at Heart (Image 1) shows a man in 
silhouette jumping from an elevated rock to a plateau that 
appears to be at the summit of a mountain. On either side 
of him are tall fir trees that create vertical drama within 
an otherwise tranquil scene. It appears to be either sunrise 
or sunset. Eldredge’s name appears as a banner above the 
sprinting silhouette with the titles of his other best-sellers 
written beneath his name. On the bottom half of the cover 
Wild at Heart is written in an oversized, pale blue font that is 
in high contrast with the dark mountainside that forms the 
backdrop to the title and subtitle. A somewhat old-fashioned, 
stoic, seriffed typeface is used for all the copy that appears 
on the cover, possibly connoting traditional masculine 
associations of stability, logic and boldness.
We cannot hope to give a definitive meaning for this design, 
but may attempt to situate the cover art within the context of 
the book and Eldredge’s broader thesis in an effort to surmise 
potential readings of the image on the cover as a means of 
understanding one of many possible gender constructions 
within Christianity as a visual trope. The first question, 
then, is what Eldredge seems to be saying about Christian 
masculinity with this book. The book’s credo is spelt out as 
the following, ‘in the heart of every man is a desperate desire 
for a battle to fight, an adventure to live, and a beauty to 
rescue’ (Eldredge 2001:9).
Page 3 of 9
Used by permission of Thomas Nelson, Inc.; original package design 2001 c Thomas Nelson, Inc. 
IMAGE 1: Front cover of Wild at Heart (2001).
 Original Research
http://www.ve.org.za doi:10.4102/ve.v32i1.487
Early on in the discussion, Eldredge (2001:41) quotes Henry 
David Thoreau as musing, more than 150 years ago, that: 
‘The mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation.’4 To 
Eldredge this appears to be the great truth of the current age, 
which men everywhere in the Western world are in a state of 
crisis. He is not the first to suggest this. In 1978 the celebrated 
Christian author, Leanne Payne, wrote a book entitled Crisis 
in masculinity and in 2000 the secular theorist, Anthony Clare, 
entitled his psychological analysis of contemporary men, On 
men: Masculinity in crisis. But Eldredge was, perhaps, the 
first writer to popularise this idea. The problem, according 
to Eldredge (2001:41–42), is that ‘there is no battle to fight, 
unless it’s traffic and meetings and hassles and bills’ … all 
of which lead to anger and boredom rather than a sense of 
really being alive. In the typical language of mythic popular 
culture, Eldredge quotes the filmic William Wallace who in 
Braveheart (Gibson 1995) sagely mused that ‘all men die, few 
men live’. Through the early chapters of the book it becomes 
clear that for Eldredge every boy and man questions whether 
he has what it takes. Whether he, like William Wallace, could 
fight the foe and win the girl. Eldredge seems to feel that 
contemporary Western men have lost their ability to fight for 
what they believe in, they have lost their masculine essence. 
And that, according to Eldredge (2001:48), is the problem, 
that most men are not ready ‘to fight, to live with risk, to 
capture the beauty.’ This so-called problem is apparently 
aggravated by the church.
Wild at Heart sowed seeds that, according to Brandon O’Brien 
(2008:49) sprouted as a new masculinity movement aimed to 
get men into church by changing the church’s atmosphere. 
In South Africa, we are experiencing a further religious 
(gendered) wave in the Mighty Men phenomenon spearheaded
by potato farmer, Angus Buchan, a movement that 
seemingly attempts to re-align men with a godly vision of 
masculine identity (and responsibility?). David Murrow, 
author of Why men hate going to church (2005), founded the 
group Church for Men in the United States because, whilst 
the local congregation is ‘perfectly designed to reach women 
and older folks’, with its emphasis on comfort, nurture 
and relationship, it ‘offers little to stir the masculine heart, 
so men find it dull and irrelevant’ (in O’Brien 2008:49). In 
Driscoll’s opinion, the church has produced ‘a bunch of nice, 
soft, tender, chickified church boys’ (in O’Brien 2008:49). In 
his oafish, bombastic and homophobic way, Driscoll goes 
on to maintain that ‘latte-sipping Cabriolet drivers’ do not 
represent biblical masculinity, because ‘real men’ (like Jesus, 
Paul and John the Baptist) are ‘dudes: heterosexual, win-afight,
punch-you-in-the-nose dudes’ (in O’Brien 2008:50). 
In other words, because Jesus is not a ‘limp-wristed, dress4.American
philosopher and naturalist Thoreau isolated himself at Walden Pond in 
Massachusetts from 1845 to 1847. His experiences during that time were published 
in Walden (1854). In a well-known passage, Thoreau stated his purpose: ‘I went to 
the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts 
of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to 
die, discover that I had not lived. I did not wish to live what was not life, living is so 
dear; nor did I wish to practice resignation ...’ In the first essay, ‘Economy’, Thoreau 
comments that most men are slaves to their work and enslaved to those for whom 
they work. He concludes: ‘The mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation. What 
is called resignation is confirmed desperation ...’ (Wallechinsky & Wallace 2009). 
This passage indicates that Thoreau identified a crisis in masculinity even then and 
related this to the manner in which Western male identity is connected to work or 
fiscal productivity. This connection would later be teased out by theorists such as 
Leanne Payne (1978) and Anthony Clare (2000). 
wearing hippie’5 (Driscoll in O’Brien 2008:50), the men who 
follow him should not be thoughtful, critical and caring, but 
rather aggressive, violent, nonverbal (and bigoted?). This 
reductionist and elementary perspective may be overstated 
for effect but it is nevertheless a dangerous take on the 
masculine ideal that Christian men should aspire to and 
serves to colour in the backdrop against which Eldredge 
introduced his own masculine ideal. According to O’Brien 
(2008:50), ‘The authors don’t say so explicitly, but their 
rhetoric assumes manly instincts are inherently godly’.
One need not scrutinise Eldredge too closely to discover 
the defining attribute of his masculine ideal. As the title 
suggests, the most important characteristic of this man is that 
he is wild at heart. It is not explicitly spelled out what exactly 
this means, but suffice it to say his vision of ideal manhood 
involves being active and aggressive or ready to fight (though 
not in a violent macho way). For Eldredge, this fight involves 
the way you are willing to fight for your wife on an emotional 
level and spend time with your children in spite of an 
encroaching outside world (which may include the church) 
that is determined to steal their and your attention. He does 
not, in other words, propose that all men become gladiators 
or William Wallaces, but he does seem to want to counter 
5.From all accounts, it seems that the historical Jesus did, in fact, wear a ‘dress’. 
Page 4 of 9
Used by permission of Thomas Nelson, Inc.; original package design 2001 c Thomas Nelson, Inc. 
IMAGE 2: Back cover of Wild at Heart (2001).
 Original Research
http://www.ve.org.za doi:10.4102/ve.v32i1.487
Page 5 of 9
that other answer to masculinity in crisis, the metrosexual. 
The metrosexual is born out of the 18th century flâneur and 
his consumption of the city. The term was first used in Britain 
in 1994 when social commentator, Mark Simpson, used the 
word to refer to the disposition of modern, urbane men who 
embrace the dandified accoutrement of self-beautification. 
Simpson (2004) describes the metrosexual as: 
[A] young man with money to spend, living in or within easy 
reach of a metropolis – because that’s where all the best shops, 
clubs, gyms and hairdressers are. He might be officially gay, 
straight or bisexual, but this is utterly immaterial because he has 
clearly taken himself as his own love object and pleasure as his 
sexual preference.6
(Simpson 2004)
Eldredge seems to sketch this pattern as detrimental to male 
vitality and seems determined to draw men out of salons 
and clubs (and offices?) back to nature. In doing so, however, 
he slips into the rhetoric of active masculinity and passive 
femininity, a binary articulation which reduces Christian men 
and women to cartoonish gendered types.
It is worthy to note that no reference to the importance of a 
man’s appearance is made in Wild at Heart or on its cover. This 
tendency coincides with Eldredge’s above discussed negation 
of metrosexuality, which often emphasises male appearance 
above other things. The downplay of the relevance of outward 
appearance to masculine identity proves to be one of the most 
significant contrasts between the two books and their covers, 
as the importance of physical beauty to feminine identity is 
over-emphasised, as will be argued in the following section 
of this article. As for the cover of the book, one might now 
read the image of the leaping protagonist as one that affirms 
the notion of men actively pursuing their dreams. At this, the 
dawn of a new day, the masculine is cast as the heroic that 
must conquer his surroundings in an epic battle for his male 
soul. Our hero has a backpack on his back, indicating that he is 
prepared for the journey he now faces alone. His isolation from 
the rest of the world is accented by the untamed nature that 
surrounds him. Beneath him the dark mountain hints at the 
obstacles and dangers he will face on his journey. For herein 
lies his worth, that he can overcome the looming peril. But it 
is not without help that he conquers the reality of a menacing 
threat. The fir trees on either side of him reach up to his God 
recalling the pantheistic landscapes of Casper David Friedrich 
that visualised the Romantic belief that God is to be found in 
nature. The masculine is thus in divine communion with God 
as he fulfils his calling.
The milieu within which this intrepid adventurer finds himself 
is the wild and epic outdoors. Here, on Eldredge’s cover the 
age-old binary of nature being associated with the feminine 
and culture with the masculine is thwarted so that the civilised 
domain of culture and domesticity is as threatening to the 
6.Metrosexuality has, subsequently, become a part of the aspirational syntax of 
popular media like men’s lifestyle magazines that aim to procure the support of 
high end advertisers and in doing so endorse the connection between masculinity 
and consumption. This phenomenon is not overtly present in all South African 
media, seems, increasingly, to be an important signifier in the redefining of 
masculine identity in this context, particularly considering the fact that ‘modern 
forms of consumption privilege certain public masculinities as the subject of the 
look’ (Nixon 1996:70).
masculine as the very feminine itself. The ultimate fight, it 
seems, is not for a woman, but for yourself. Eldredge deftly 
proposes that in order to do so every man must embark on 
a solitary journey that will have him leaping from summit to 
summit at the dawn of his new life.
The visual elements on Wild at Heart’s cover function to 
construct a hero-myth in relation to masculine identity by 
tapping into connotations of adventurism, danger, challenge, 
wildness, exploration and conquering. The way in which 
the male figure on this cover is placed in his surroundings, 
actively inspecting the landscape, cements these connotations 
and feeds the hero-myth. Another aspect of the hero myth is 
his desire to have a beauty to rescue. This particular masculine 
identity construction passively positions the female as the 
Beauty, an object, something to acquire, perhaps even a quest 
to fulfil, echoing classic Hollywood cinema. Patriarchal power 
is thus protected at the end of the day. The masculine is granted 
Carte Blanche in terms of his right to agency and proactivity. 
He is commanded to do many things and act according to his 
masculine will, to be wild, to fight, to live. But perhaps there 
is already a blotch on this blank folio, as he is symbolically 
and hegemonically bound to the patriarchal rhetoric of hyperheterosexuality.
Captivating
The cover of Captivating is to some extent read in comparison 
to that of Wild at Heart, as Captivating can, arguably, be 
considered a supplementary text to Wild at Heart. Wild at 
Heart acts almost as a preface to Captivating, as Wild at Heart, 
already in Chapter 1, lays out the secrets of a woman’s 
soul (Eldredge 2001:14–18). Critical Christian blogger, Tim 
Challies (2005), points out that Captivating’s front cover 
(Image 3) clearly and pertinently refers to Wild at Heart, 
by citing Eldredge as ‘Best-selling author of Wild at Heart’. 
In a similar vein, the back cover of Captivating (Image 4) 
proclaims: ‘What Wild at Heart did for men Captivating will 
do for you’. Captivating furthermore quotes extensively from 
Wild at Heart and even includes a lengthy excerpt from Wild 
at Heart towards the end of the book. Moreover, the messages 
of the two books can be considered to be basically the same. 
Challies (2005:3 of 3) crystallises this fact with the following 
statement: ‘Overall, this book is little more than Wild at Heart 
written for women – with a soft, feminine cover in place of 
the harsh, masculine one’.
When specifically considering the book covers, one finds that 
unlike the hero myth that is found on Wild at Heart’s cover, 
Captivating’s cover makes pertinent reference to fairytale 
myths. Most of the formal elements, as well as constructed 
codes, on this cover point to this idea and function to connect 
fairytale myth with feminine identity construction.
As masculinity is strongly identified with adventurism, 
exploration and conquer on Wild at Heart’s cover, feminine 
identity is here identified with nature, beauty and the 
ephemeral. A duality is constructed between these two 
covers, which feeds on the existing active male–passive 
 Original Research
http://www.ve.org.za doi:10.4102/ve.v32i1.487
Page 6 of 9
female binary in Sherry Ortner’s (1998) terms. In order 
to explain the universal subordination of women, Ortner 
(1998:29) applies the nature–culture duality to the male–
female duality and aligns male to culture and female to 
nature. Although subversive of the nature or culture typology 
in one respect, on another level one can see that on the cover 
of Wild at Heart that this male-culture alignment appears 
intact to the extent that the solitary boulder-jumping male 
figure appears as an exploring and even conquering force 
in the landscape. The female figure on Captivating’s cover 
manifests quite differently than her male counterpart in this 
regard. A solitary female figure appears in the lower lefthand
corner of the cover. Unlike the active male figure, she 
seems to be passively situated in nature, strolling peacefully 
about a field. She is not forcefully conquering the landscape 
she is placed in, but blends in to form a part of it. The inherent 
female passivity in Captivating is already foreshadowed 
in Wild at Heart, where it is stated that a man desires a 
beauty to rescue (Eldredge 2001:14). The female’s role is this 
transaction extends only as far as being that beauty. CameryHogatt
and Munn (2005) colourfully captures the Eldredges’ 
imbedded ideology of female passivity and male activity in 
the following statement:
Whereas the Wild at Heart man is encouraged to pursue private 
adventures (his erstwhile damsel-in-distress, now a conjugal 
prop, is only along for the ride), a woman’s capabilities are 
evaluated strictly according to their effect upon her mate.
(Camery-Hogatt & Munn 2005:26)
Most of the visual elements on Captivating’s cover could 
be considered more ‘feminine’ than those found on Wild at 
Heart’s cover. The text used for the book’s title is elegant 
and flowing as opposed to the bold stoic text used for Wild 
at Heart’s title. Small fragments seem to be eroded from the 
lettering of the word Captivating giving the idea that the font 
is fading away, fleeting and tentative. This font attribute 
links to other whimsical associations created on the cover. 
The play of light cuts through the female figure, rendering 
her almost translucent. This gives the female figure a certain 
whimsical, transient quality, as though she is fading away, 
or disappearing into the light. One could argue that this, as 
well as other whimsical elements on the cover, functions to 
associate the feminine with the transcendental or the spiritual. 
The subtitle of the book, Unveiling the Mystery of a Woman’s 
Soul, also betrays this agenda to associate the feminine with 
the supernatural or otherworldly, by referring to the female 
soul as a veiled mystery, the unknown and illogical.
Fairytale-like myths of princesses and castles are at work 
on the Captivating cover. At the lower right of the cover one 
sees an easily recognisable, though blurry, castle. The female 
figure in the left appears to be moving towards this castle. 
Feminine identity is here thus strongly and openly associated 
with the romantic ideas behind fairytales, castles and 
beautiful princesses desiring to be rescued by their prince. 
The central thesis of the book is robustly linked to this visual 
association of the feminine to fairytale myth. The Eldredges 
believe that they are ‘unveiling the mystery of a woman’s 
soul’ as the title suggests, which is that every woman desires 
to be desired. The blurb on the book’s back cover reads: 
Every woman was once a little girl. And every little girl holds 
in her heart her most precious dreams. She longs to be swept up 
into a romance, to play an irreplaceable role in a great adventure, 
to be the Beauty of the story. Those desires are far more than 
child’s play. They are the secret to the feminine heart. 
(Eldredge & Eldredge 2005)
The Eldredges construct femininity in monolithic, 
heterosexual terms, claiming truth for all women and placing 
heavy emphasis on the importance of infantile romantic 
fantasies in an adult woman’s life. This tendency already 
manifests in the earlier text of Wild at Heart, where Eldredge 
(2001:16) echoes the above-quoted passage: ‘Her childhood 
dreams of a knight in shining armor are not girlish fantasies, 
they are the core of the feminine heart and the life she knows 
she was made for’. One cannot help but to, again, recognise 
undertones of the classical Hollywood damsel-in-distress 
narrative.
What is interesting with regard to this feminine identity 
construction is that it is done in relation to that of male
identity. It is the male heart, whether human or godly, which 
a woman is meant to captivate and it is in a man’s adventure 
that she is to play an irreplaceable role and be the Beauty. 
Used by permission of Thomas Nelson, Inc.; original package design 2005 c Thomas Nelson, Inc. 
IMAGE 3: Front cover of Captivating (2005).
 Original Research
http://www.ve.org.za doi:10.4102/ve.v32i1.487
Whereas Wild at Heart’s message to men is: ‘Be a real man and 
let them deal with your masculinity,’ (cf. Eldredge 2001:151) 
the message Captivating is sending to women seems to be: 
‘You have to please men – deal with it’. Again, the feminine 
is already constructed in these terms in Wild at Heart, as 
Eldredge (2001:16) states: ‘Every woman wants an adventure 
to share ... A woman doesn’t want to be the adventure; she 
wants to be caught up into something greater than herself’. 
Implying a man’s adventure, we presume.
In Captivating, the Eldredges place conspicuous emphasis on 
feminine physical beauty or (passively) being the Beauty in 
the story, as previously mentioned. The Eldredges (2005:130) 
state: ‘The essence of a woman is Beauty. She is meant to be 
the incarnation ... of a Captivating God ... Beauty is what the 
world longs to experience from a woman’. This emphasis on 
what seems to be outward beauty is somewhat contradictory 
to mainstream Christian belief, which often downplays 
physical beauty in women to favour spiritual virtue. It 
seems as though the Eldredges are encouraging women to 
strive for physically captivating beauty. Resultantly, CameryHoggatt
and Munn (2005:25) observes, ‘This woman’s 
only qualifications, it seems, are her good looks and her 
helplessness – athleticism, artistic ability, erudition, and 
moral virtue are not taken into consideration’.
This tendency of Captivating and Wild at Heart to overemphasise
feminine beauty is significant as it provides 
an example of a case where Christian culture draws from 
mainstream culture rather than from accepted theological 
doctrine, as anticipated, for point of reference. The 
mainstream media often portrays women as powerful 
as a result of sexual power derived from their physical 
beauty. The Eldredges are alluding to the same idea when 
propagating the notion that a woman’s sole purpose is to be 
desired and to captivate the attention of the masculine. This 
feeds into mainstream gender stereotypes of female beauty 
and contradicts expectations of piety from Christian women, 
as described by Christina Landman (1994).
Reviewer for Christianity Today, Agnieszka Tennant (2006:60), 
believes that the beauty the Eldredges are alluding to is not 
the earth-shattering, mind-altering Beauty as found in classic 
and modern literature, as well as the discourse around 
the sublimity of beauty, but rather ‘mere prettification, 
a tendency towards sentimental adornment’. Tennant 
(2006:60) proposes that the Eldredges are limiting the source 
of beauty to women only and that their beauty is, in fact, ‘not 
wild enough’. In our opinion, the Eldredges are falling into 
the essentialist trap of aligning the feminine with decorative 
ornamentation, especially on the cover of Captivating as well 
as in both texts. We have already mentioned some of the 
decorative and whimsical elements on Captivating’s cover, 
but the female figure’s clothing serves as a case in point. On 
her skirt a decorative, seemingly flowery, pattern becomes 
visible and her head is adorned with a translucent, bridal 
veil-like scarf or head wrap. There is much discourse around 
the alignment of the female with decoration and craft or 
‘low-culture’, versus the alignment of the masculine with 
abstraction (the opposite of decoration in artistic terms) and 
art or ‘high-culture’,7 which for the sake of brevity we will 
not venture into. It would suffice to say that the Eldredges 
are most visually participating in this binary alignment of the 
feminine to the decorative, which corresponds to the femalenature-passivity
construct explored earlier. The female figure 
on Captivating’s cover and perhaps in the two texts as well, 
appears as decorative ornament, sentimentally floating 
through the landscape.
A final issue to be raised about Captivating is that of the 
sexual undertones of the proposed unveiling of the mystery 
of a woman’s soul. A few bloggers have picked up on Wild 
at Heart and Captivating’s sexualisation of the female, most 
notably Challies (2005) and Camery-Hogatt and Munn 
(2005). Challies (2005) cites the following passage from 
Captivating (Eldredge & Eldredge 2005) in order to critique 
the Eldredges’ belief that ‘God has a deep, fiery passionate 
love for women and that he wishes to romance us [sic]’:
Let’s go back for a moment to the movies that you love. Think 
of one of the most romantic scenes you can remember, scenes 
7.See, amongst others, Nochlin (1971), Parker and Pollock (1981), Broude (1982), 
Broude and Garrard (eds. 1982, 1992 & 2005) Gouma-Peterson and Matthews 
(1987), Owens (1992) and Arnold and Schmahmann (2005).
Used by permission of Thomas Nelson, Inc.; original package design 2005 c Thomas Nelson, Inc. 
IMAGE 4: Back cover of Captivating (2005).
Page 7 of 9
 Original Research
http://www.ve.org.za doi:10.4102/ve.v32i1.487
that made you sigh. Jack with Rose on the bow of the Titanic, 
his arms around her waist, their first kiss. Wallace speaking in 
French to Murron, then in Italian: ‘‘Not as beautiful as you’’. 
Aragorn standing with Arwen in the moonlight on the bridge 
in Rivendell ... Now, put yourself in the scene as the Beauty, and 
Jesus as the Lover.
(Eldredge & Eldredge 2005:113)
The previous, for Challies (2005), ‘clearly goes beyond the 
biblical metaphors for God’s love’. We would suggest that 
passages such as the previous not only sexually objectifies 
women, but goes as far as to suggest Jesus Christ himself as 
an erotic lover to the female, which clearly goes beyond the 
metaphors most of us hold for the Christ-figure. CameryHoggatt
and Munn (2005:25) implies that female agency, in 
terms of the books, resides solely within sexuality, by stating 
that, ‘[t]he only area of endeavour in which the model Wild at 
Heart woman is granted proactivity, apparently, is sex ...’ The 
Wild at heart and Captivating woman is sketched, extremely 
paradoxically, as a seductress. ‘[S]he can use all she has as 
a woman to get him to use all he’s got as a man. She can 
arouse, inspire, energize ... seduce him. Ask your man what 
he’d prefer’ (Eldredge 2001:192).8 Here one finds, at best, an 
eschewed view on Christian sexuality, again rather drawing 
on mainstream culture, than on theology. 
The above passification, subordination and sexualisation of 
the feminine in Wild at Heart and Captivating, ultimately leads 
to gross negation of female agency and leads to dependence 
on and infatuation with the masculine, which mirrors the 
passification, subordination and sexualisation of the feminine 
in mainstream patriarchal ideology. Eldredge (2001:17) 
makes no secret of his alignment with an ideology of female 
passification: ‘The world kills a woman’s heart when it tells 
her to be tough, efficient and independent’. Surely the many 
feminist activists from Simone de Beauvoir to Lucy Irigaray 
would strongly disagree with this statement. Can women 
not also be ‘wild at heart’ or are they merely meant to be 
‘wild at home’, as Camery-Hoggatt and Munn (2005:25) so 
eloquently put it?
One must acknowledge that Captivating does put itself ‘out 
there’ in attempting to provide guidance for Christian women 
in their expected gender roles. Campbell (2007:52), however, 
points to the fact that, ‘the book, like so many others in its 
genre, gives only perfunctory answers to the more vexing 
questions about women and religion today.’ Captivating does 
indeed almost entirely ignore issues around biblical gender 
egalitarianism, the feminist problematic of women’s roles 
and purpose in patriarchal churches, as well the subsequent 
turn to goddess worship and this seems to be a dramatic 
absence given the purpose of the book. It is also necessary 
to note that neither Wild at Heart nor Captivating considers 
alternative sexualities, such as homosexuality, bisexuality 
and transsexuality, as options for Christian men and women 
in their quest for answers regarding the nature of their sex 
roles in spiritual and secular society.
8.This quotation refers to Eldredge’s (2001:191–192) passage on Ruth’s seduction of 
Boaz, where he antithetically sates: ‘This seduction is pure and simple – and God 
holds it up for all women to follow when he not only gives Ruth her own book in the 
Bible but also names her in the genealogy’. 
Conclusion
Both of the images on the book covers discussed are 
photographic and perhaps it is worth taking a moment to 
discuss the theoretical implications of this medium being 
used here. Susan Sontag (2008:4) has noted that ‘Photographic 
images do not seem to be statements about the world so much 
as pieces of it, miniatures of reality that anyone can make 
or acquire.’ For her, then, ‘photographs furnish evidence’ 
(Sontag 2008:5). ‘[T]he camera record justifies’ (Sontag 2008: 
5). Perhaps this means that the book covers discussed in this 
article are not merely statements about the authors intent 
regarding the meaning of gender, but statements about the 
manner in which gender functions in reality. They are not 
just codes but are a reality themselves, a coded moment 
of reality meant, in Hall’s terms to be decoded and thus, 
internalised. Again, Sontag (2008: 8) deems photography ‘a 
social rite, a defence against anxiety, and a tool of power’. 
She comments that through photographs families construct 
a portrait chronicle of themselves – ‘a portable kit of images 
that bears witness to its connectedness’ (Sontag 2008:8). In 
Homi Bhabha’s (1994) terms, photographic imagery may 
thus serve as a connective narrative binding together families 
or, as in this case, a community. And herein lies the rub. Do 
the Eldredges’ book covers provide a portrait of the Christian 
family that is stereotypical at best and prescriptive at worst?
This article posed the question whether the visual semiotics of 
the cover art of Wild at Heart and Captivating further enshrine 
the gender stereotypes found in mainstream popular Christian 
media. Through an analysis of these visual texts it was found 
that the codes used in the covers continue the binary reading 
of gender that is established within secular media and do so 
within the seemingly authoritative context of the sublime. 
These books and their covers thus serve as prescriptive texts 
on how Christian gender should be performed in society. 
We also found that, in this case, popular secular mainstream 
media influences popular Christian media to a great extent, 
as the Eldredges’ ‘theology’ is rather based on Hollywood 
than on a biblical model of gender. It could perhaps then 
be argued that owing to this tendency mainstream gender 
stereotypes are also further solidified.
As mentioned earlier, we do not suggest a definitive reading 
of these covers, but a reading, amongst many possible 
readings, about the meanings constructed, ideologies 
conveyed and realities created by these covers at Hall (1980) 
and Corner’s (1983) moment of encoding, moment of the text 
and moment of decoding, which strictly speaking implies the 
position of the reader, but is also already forecast by the text’s 
encoding and own textuality.
For the purpose of this article we were interested in the way 
the Eldredges’ theses are translated into visual terms on the 
covers of the two books in question, as well as in how gender 
is represented on the covers and how they are constructing 
gendered Christian identity. As mentioned earlier, the 
visuality of Christian culture is important subject matter for 
media theorists, not least because Christian visual media 
Page 8 of 9
 Original Research
http://www.ve.org.za doi:10.4102/ve.v32i1.487
must influence Christian culture and not just the other way 
around. In conclusion, we maintain that the manner in which 
beliefs about gendered sex roles are communicated through 
the visual material promoting itself as ‘Christian’ in the 
hegemonic sense demands further analysis from a secular 
(feminist) perspective as well as in terms of the cultural 
‘meanings’ of visual imagery within Western society. For us, 
both book covers are complicit in making the gendered reality 
represented in these books atomic, manageable and opaque. 
‘It is a view of the world which denies interconnectedness, 
continuity, but which confers on each moment the character 
of a mystery’ (Sontag 2008:23).
References
Arendt, H. (ed.), 1968, Illuminations, transl. H. Zohn, Schocken Books, New York.
Arnold, M. & Schmahmann, B., 2005, Between union and liberation. Women artists in 
South Africa 1910–1994, Ashgate, Aldershot.
Bhabha, H.K., 1994, The location of culture, Routledge, London & New York.
Barthes, R., 1972, Mythologies, transl. A. Lavers, Paladin, London.
Barthes, R., 1979, Image-music-text, transl. S. Heath, Glasgow, Fontana/Collins. 
Benjamin, W., [1935] 1968, ‘The work of art in the age of mechanical reproduction’, 
in H. Arendt (ed.), Illuminations, transl. H. Zohn, pp. 217–252, Schocken Books, 
New York.
Bignell, J., 2002, Media semiotics. An introduction, 2nd edn., Manchester University 
Press, Manchester & New York.
Brandt, R., 2003, ‘Wild at Heart: Discovering the secret of a man’s soul. By John 
Eldredge’ in Contend4TheFaith, viewed 07 July 2009, from http://blogspy.com/
contend/bookWild.html 
Broude, N., 1982, ‘Miriam Shapiro and “femmage”: Reflections on the conflict 
between decoration and abstraction in twentieth-century art’, in N. Broude & 
M.D. Garrard (eds.), Feminism and art history: questioning the litany, pp. 315–
330, Harper & Row, New York.
Broude, N. & Garrard, M.D. (eds.), 1982, Feminism and art history: questioning the 
litany, Harper & Row, New York.
Broude, N. & Garrard, M.D. (eds.), 1992, The expanding discourse. Feminism and Art 
history, Icon, New York.
Broude, N. & Garrard, M.D. (eds.), 2005, Reclaiming female agency. Feminist art 
history after postmodernism, University of California Press, Berkeley.
Camery-Hoggatt, B. & Munn, N., 2005, ‘Wild at heart: Essential reading or “junk food 
for the soul”?’, Priscilla Papers 19(4), 24–26.
Campbell, C.C., 2007, ‘God and the second sex’, First things: a monthly journal of 
religion and public life 176:51–56.
Challies, T., 2004, ‘Book review- Wild at Heart’; in Challies.com, viewed 07 July 2009, 
from http://www.challies.com/archives/general-news/book-review-wil.php
Challies, T., 2005, ‘Book review- Captivating’, in Challies.com, viewed 07 July 2009, 
from, http://www.challies.com/book-reviews/book-review-captivating
Chandler, D., 1994, ‘Encoding/Decoding’, in Semiotics for Beginners, viewed 20 
November 2010, from http://www.aber.ac.uk/media/Documents/S4B/sem08c.
html 
Clare, A., 2000, On Men: Masculinity in Crisis, Chatto & Windus, London.
Corner, J., 1983, ‘Textuality, Communication and Power’, in H. Davis & P. Walton (eds.), 
Language, Image, Media, pp. 266–281, Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
Eldredge, J., 2001, Wild at Heart. Discovering the secret of a man’s soul, Thomas 
Nelson, Nashville, T.N.
Eldredge, J. & Eldredge, S., 2005, Captivating. Unveiling the mystery of a woman’s 
soul, Thomas Nelson, Nashville, T.N.
Gallagher, S.K. & Wood, S.L., 2005, ‘Godly manhood gone wild?: Transformations 
in conservative protestant masculinity’, Sociology of religion 66(2), 135–160. 
doi:10.2307/4153083
Gibson, M. (dir.), 1995, Braveheart, Paramount Pictures Corporation, Hollywood, CA.
Gouma-Peterson, T. & Matthews, P., 1987, ‘The feminist critique of art history’, The art 
bulletin LXIX(3), 326–357.  doi:10.2307/3051059
Haddad, M., 2009, ‘Women who were wild at heart’, in Sojourners, viewed 07 July 
2009, from http://blog.sojo.net/2009/05/11/women-who-were-wild-at-heart/
Hagenau, S., 2009, email, 28 October, SHagenau@thomasnelson.com
Hall, S., 1980, ‘Encoding/Decoding*’, in S. Hall, D. Hobson, A. Lowe & P. Willis (eds.), 
Culture, media, language, pp. 166–176, Hutchinson, London.
Landman, C., 1994, The piety of Afrikaans women. Diaries of guilt, University of South 
Africa, Pretoria.
LeBlanc, D., 2004, ‘Wild heart’, Christianity today, August, 30–36.
Murrow, D., 2005, Why men hate going to church, Thomas Nelson, Nashville, T.N.
Nead, L., 1992, The female nude: Art, obscenity and sexuality, Routledge, London. 
doi:10.4324/9780203328194
Nixon, S., 1996, Hard looks, masculinities, spectatorship and contemporary 
Consumption, University of California Press & St. Martin’s, New York.
Nochlin, L., [1971] 1989, ‘Why have there been no great women artists?’ in L. Nochlin 
(ed.), Women, art, and power, and other essays, pp. 145–178, Thames & Hudson, 
London.
Nochlin, L. (ed.), 1989, Women, art, and power, and other essays. Thames & Hudson, 
London.
O’Brien, B., 2008, ‘A Jesus for real men. What the masculinity movement gets right 
and wrong’, Christianity today, April, 49–52.
Ortner, S.B., 1998, ‘Is female to male as nature is to culture?’ in L.J. Peach (ed.), 
Women in culture. A women’s studies anthology, pp. 23–44, Blackwell , Oxford. 
Owens, C., 1992, ‘The discourse of others. Feminists and Postmodernism’, in S. Bryson, 
B. Kruger, L. Tillman & J. Weinstock (eds.), Beyond recognition. Representation, 
power and culture, pp. 166–186, University of California Press, Berkeley & Los 
Angeles.
Parker, R. & Pollock, G., 1981, Old mistresses. Women, art and ideology, Routledge, 
London.
Payne, L., 1978, Crisis in masculinity, Crossway, Wheaton.
Peach, L.J. (ed.), 1998, Women in culture. A women’s studies anthology, Blackwell, 
Oxford.
Ransomed Heart Ministries, 2009, Who we are, viewed 30 June 2009, from http://
www.ransomedheart.com/ministry/who-we-are.aspx
Simpson, M., 2004, ‘MetroDaddy speaks’, in Mark Simpson.com, viewed 19 June 2006, 
from, http://www.marksimpson.com/pages/journalism/metrodaddyspeaks.html
Sontag, S., [1971] 2008, On photography, Penguin, London.
Tennant, A., 2006, ‘What (not all) women want. The finicky femininity of Captivating by 
John and Stasi Eldredge’, Christianity Today, August, 60.
Wallechinsky, D. & Wallace, I., 2009, ‘Origins of Sayings - The Mass of Men Lead Lives 
of Quiet Desperation’, in Trivia Library, viewed 24 November 2009, from http://
www.trivia-library.com/b/origins-of-sayings-the-mass-of-men-lead-lives-of-quietdesperation.htm
Wingerd, D., n.d., ‘A critical review of the book, Wild at Heart, by John Eldredge’, in 
Christian Communications Worldwide, viewed 30 June 2009, from http://www.
ccwonline.org/wild.html
Winslow, L., 2007, ‘Naturally uncivilized: Locating the subject position in Wild at 
heart’, paper presented at the 93rd annual National Communication Association 
convention, Hilton & Towers Palmer House Hilton, Chicago, I.L, 15–18th November.
Page 9 of 9
