UVA-ENT-0027 
 
 
This case was prepared by Andrea Larson, Assistant Professor of Business Administration. It was written as a basis for 
class discussion rather than to illustrate effective or ineffective handling of an administrative situation. Copyright  1997 
by the University of Virginia Darden School Foundation, Charlottesville, VA. All rights reserved. To order copies, send 
an e-mail to sales@dardenpublishing.com. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
used in a spreadsheet, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or 
otherwise—without the permission of the Darden School Foundation. Rev. 1/99.  
  
 
 
 
WALDEN PADDLERS 
 
 
In late 1995, Paul Farrow, at age 45, could look back with satisfaction and pleasure at the 
path his company, Walden Paddlers, had traversed in the three years since he first wrote his business 
plan. The company had produced its first kayak, made from recycled plastic milk bottles, in April 
1993. Since then, Walden Paddlers had sold over 5,000 boats. Three models had been successfully 
designed and built, and then had been sold through leading national retailers to consumers who were 
looking for good value. Although competition was growing, the market yet to be reached was 
significant. With over $1 million in sales and a comfortable cash flow, Farrow, along with his 
partner Dale Vetter, was ready to take the company in a new direction. But the precise course was 
not entirely clear. 
 
For the past few months, Farrow had considered alternative products, possible new markets, 
capital requirements, the implications for growth, and whether the company could continue as a twoperson
virtual corporation through the next stage. One option was to stay the course, focusing on the 
low end of the kayak market and producing a limited number of models. A second path was to 
expand aggressively into more kayak segments, moving up from recreational boats all the way to 
white-water and sea-going kayaks. A third option was to diversify into other recreational products 
for outdoor use made of recycled plastics. Farrow and Vetter had also looked at recycled products 
targeted at automotive and footwear markets. Each direction had its pluses and minuses, and Farrow 
needed to make some commitments soon. Looking back over the past three years, he commented, “I 
hate to think what I might be doing if I hadn’t started the business. I’d probably be overweight, 
working in an office somewhere, constantly bored or at least anguished.” He now faced some tough 
decisions and if these questions caused anguish, at least it was the right kind of anguish. His business 
was already successful, but what should come next? 
 
 
Founder’s Background  
 
Farrow typically dismissed his Wharton undergraduate degree in finance, claiming he had 
learned more about business selling new Toyotas during those same years. But in the 1970s, his 
finance education enabled him to work as the budget and planning manager for Environmental 
Research and Technology, a small new firm that designed air quality monitoring programs and 
conducted meteorological research. By the end of the 1980s, he had worked in financial and general 
management positions (strategic and corporate planning) with several environmentally related 
  -2- UVA-ENT-0027 
 
corporations that had experienced rapid growth. Because of his love for the outdoors, Farrow made a 
point of working with environmentally-conscious corporations. This emphasis, however, did not 
hamper his success as a manager: one firm Farrow had worked for grew from $7 million to $20 
million under his direction as CFO, and later CEO. In another situation, he participated in a small 
company turnaround that had required significant layoffs and reinvention of the product line. Farrow 
tended to become deeply involved with whatever he did and as his experience base grew he became 
more particular about what type of work he wanted. At one point, he left his position as president of 
an electronic equipment manufacturing company because, as he later explained, “It wasn’t 
satisfying, in a soul sense.” In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Farrow served as general manager of 
the ORS Environmental Equipment division of Groundwater Technology, where he had 
responsibility for 100 employees and $10 million in revenues. 
 
As early as his twenties, Farrow had set out specific criteria for the type of work he wanted. 
He wanted to do something independent, he wanted to make something rather than work in a service 
business, he wanted to do something that connected to healthy outdoor exercise, and he wanted to 
have fun. When he was laid off from Groundwater Technologies in a downsizing in the summer of 
1992, Farrow took the time to reflect on the criteria and vision he had set out earlier in his life. The 
termination agreement provided him with corporate out-placement resources of an office, telephone, 
staff, and research facilities. The question was whether he would take this opportunity to start 
something new or go back into a traditional corporate environment. No ideas for a business had yet 
presented themselves. 
 
While on a family vacation in Maine he observed that well-made kayaks were available for 
expert kayakers, but the novice had little choice but to spend over $400 on a boat that usually lacked 
the design characteristics that would allow him or her to easily master and enjoy the experience. 
Farrow’s knowledge of plastic prices enabled him to do some back-of-the-envelope calculations. 
When he and his sons went out in their boat, they were riding in 35 pounds of 40 cent-per-pound 
plastic. Was there an opportunity here? A vision began to take hold on that Maine trip. Why couldn’t 
Farrow use recycled plastic to produce an inexpensive boat that had many of the outstanding design 
features of more expensive kayaks? 
 
 
Industry and Competition 
 
He returned home and began to research the kayak market. The paddlesports market 
consisted of canoeing, kayaking, and rafting. Although in the mid-1980s there were no industry 
statistics and no one had ever done a comprehensive market study, by the early 1990s some figures 
had emerged. A 1992 Paddlesports Market Overview report by Judy Harrison, publisher of Canoe 
magazine, stated that the market “makes up one of the most vibrant and affluent segments of today’s 
outdoor recreation industry” and that participation was growing “at a strong rate.” Yankelovich 
Clancy Shulman, the national market research firm, reported that 14 million Americans over the age  
of 16 participated in paddlesports in 1991, while another 16 million said they “intended to” do so in 
the next few years. Prime time television coverage of several paddlesports events in the 1992 
summer Olympics only fed this growing interest. 
  -3- UVA-ENT-0027 
 
Because participation numbers for kayaking were often combined into canoeing and/or 
rafting statistics, precise calculations were difficult. In 1992, it was reported that kayaking and 
rafting participation numbers were tabulated together and had been tracked since 1988. The report 
showed that participation in the combined category had increased 33% since 1988, a significant 
growth rate when compared with participation in other outdoor recreation and sports activities. 
There were three segments in the kayak market: the white-water kayakers, who represented less than 
5% of the market; touring and sea kayakers, who accounted for 5-7% of the market; and recreational 
kayakers, who made up the remainder. The high-end touring and white-water kayaks made of 
fiberglass could cost from $600 to $3,500. Recreational kayaks were in the $400-to-$600 price 
range. The weighted average per unit price for a kayak was $600 to $700 since far more boats were 
sold at the bottom end of the market.   
 
The 1991 Canoe magazine Buyers Guide listed 85 manufacturers of canoes and 75 
manufacturers of kayaks and sea kayaks. 
 
 Perception/Aquaterra was the biggest competitor in kayaks, with revenues of approximately 
$25 million to 35 million. Based in South Carolina, they dominated the American market, 
selling twenty-five models, ranging from small children’s kayaks to high-end fiberglass 
boats. Their “Keowee” recreation kayak was the world’s best-selling kayak; they had sold 
more of these than all their other units combined. 
 Dagger Canoe and Kayak Company, based in Tennessee, offered a comprehensive line of 
canoes and kayaks that cut off at the top end of the recreational market. Although they did 
lower volume compared to Perception/Aquaterra, they had an excellent reputation and were 
respected as a major player. 
 Wilderness Systems from North Carolina was third in the market. It had a broader line than 
either Perception/Aquaterra or Dagger, a devout dealer base, and an aggressive “go-for-it” 
reputation, but low market penetration.  
 Maine-based Old Town Canoe, over 100 years old, was the traditional player. With over 800 
dealers in the United States, Old Town had incredible market power but had always sold to 
the recreational market and to hunting and fishing dealers. 
 Ocean Kayak in Washington had popularized the sit-on-top kayaks used in warm climates 
and had become a strong niche player, selling about 15,000 to 20,000 units annually.  
 Kiwi, based in California, specialized in the less versatile, lower-end boats, and dominated 
that state’s market.  
 
Farrow described Kiwi’s product as the tricycle of the kayak world: beginners enjoyed learning the 
rudiments of kayaking on it, but soon wanted to move up to a “bicycle.” Farrow’s goal was to 
provide the two-wheeler. 
 
Farrow estimated that 80% of the plastic nonwhitewater kayak market was accounted for by 
Perception/Aquaterra, Dagger, Wilderness, and Old Town. Most of the 75 kayak companies were 
small operations, with the top eight to ten producing 90% of the units. It was difficult to get 
information on the leading competitors because they were all privately held, but from what Farrow 
  -4- UVA-ENT-0027 
 
could gather all manufacturers were busy and working at maximum capacity. He knew that the highend
producers were starting to produce low-end boats, and thus represented a potential threat. 
 
But the relatively small market size suggested that if an appealing boat could be built, it 
could develop the low-end recreational segment. The more research Farrow did, the more he was 
convinced that a well-designed boat without the performance characteristics of the specialized and 
expensive racing kayaks but significantly better than canoes and the existing recreational kayaks 
could change the market. Farrow read the leading magazines, Paddler, Sea Kayaker, Canoe, and 
Canoe and Kayak, searching for information that would confirm or challenge his perceptions. In 
order to identify the top American dealers (there were over 300 paddler sports retailers in the United 
States), Farrow consulted the magazines’ own lists of stores that carried their publications. He 
determined significant entry thresholds to hurdle. Novices found boats hard to get into and out of 
and were often scared of tipping over and being stuck inside the cockpit. Furthermore, prices were 
high since white-water and touring kayaks were the only options for an enjoyable time in a kayak. 
These weeks in the early fall of 1992 were busy for Farrow as he contacted trade associations, talked 
with boating organizations, interviewed kayakers, and visited retail outdoor sports stores. These 
discussions confirmed Farrow’s suspicions that selection of products was very limited and 
performance standards were low.   
 
The kayak industry was small but appeared to be growing fast. Although the industry had 
traditionally categorized kayaks and canoes as similar products, this definition was changing. In the 
1990s, canoe sales grew slowly while kayak sales expanded more rapidly, forcing the industry 
analysts to separate the two segments. Farrow estimated that 35,000 kayaks were sold each year and 
that the industry was experiencing a 20% to 50% growth rate annually. It was hard to predict what 
would happen with the kayak market. Mountain biking had rapidly gained in popularity during the 
late 1980s, but was leveling off in the mid-1990s. Windsurfing had peaked and declined—Would 
kayaks have a similar story? 
 
 
Paddlesports Consumers 
 
National polls and consumer questionnaires from trade shows provided some data on users 
prior to 1992. Sixty-one percent were males between 25 and 49 years old. The average paddler 
tended to be a 44-year-old male college graduate who owned his own home and who had a 
household income of $66,000 per year. One survey revealed that while 90% of paddlesports 
participants engaged in flatwater canoeing, 38% kayaked and 32% owned their own kayaks. It was 
clear that many paddlesports participants were cross-over paddlers involved with canoeing and 
kayaking. Canoeing appeared to be more of a family activity whereas kayaking was more of a single 
participant sport. 
 
Farrow noticed that the average age of paddlesports participants was shifting upward, with 
more adults over 40 showing interest in the activity. Studies indicated the consumer was not overly 
price sensitive when purchasing equipment, focusing more on quality, performance, and value than 
on cost. Beginner kayakers did not ask many specific questions about the product, but they wanted to 
feel confident that they could handle it and have fun. It was only after gaining some experience that 
they would inquire about tracking ability and seat comfort prior to purchase. More advanced 
  -5- UVA-ENT-0027 
 
kayakers had other concerns, including maneuverability and the durability of the hull. White-water 
kayakers were very design conscious, buying a new kayak every other year as the technology 
advanced at that end of the market. Sea kayakers were to white-water kayakers as cross-country 
skiers were to downhill skiers. Canoeing and kayaking participants tended to own their equipment 
and bought a wide range of accessories and apparel in addition to their boats and paddles. Two areas 
of the novice kayak market had shown only limited growth: women and older children and the over 
55 age group. Farrow believed that by using a targeted marketing approach he could reach these 
overlooked segments. 
 
 
Recycled Plastics Market 
 
Farrow also researched the recycled plastics market, which was still in its infancy. Collection 
programs generated an abundance of post-consumer material, but many product designers, 
concerned both about the quality of recycled plastic and the lack of technical data, were hesitant to 
use it. In 1994, only 2% of collected plastic was recycled into new products, despite the fact that 
curbside and other collection programs had grown from 600 in 1989 to over 8,500 in 1994. Of the 45 
plastics used in various products, only six were collected on a national scale: polyester terephthalate 
(PET), high-density polyethylene (HDPE), low-density polyethylene (LDPE), vinyl/polyvinyl 
chloride (PVC), polypropylene (PP), and polystyrene (PS). The appeal of these plastics was that they 
retained most of their original performance abilities and materials characteristics after recycling. 
Reclaimers—national firms that handled recycled plastics—would pelletize, clean, flake or grind, 
and then sort all six plastics for further use. 
  
  Farrow wanted Walden to be a pioneer in manufacturing with recycled plastic. Having been 
involved with environmental cleanup projects in the past, Farrow felt strongly about reducing the 
amount of waste going into landfills and encouraging the growth of secondary materials markets. 
Farrow was particularly mindful of the fact that because there was next to no market for recycled 
plastic, most collected materials ultimately ended up in landfills anyway. Walden Paddlers’ products 
would divert materials from the waste stream and help to expand the recycled plastics markets. The 
name Walden Paddlers linked to environmental values as well (see Exhibit 1) and Walden Pond was 
only a short distance from Farrow’s home. 
 
Having decided to establish Walden Paddlers, Farrow moved quickly. He completed the 
business plan by late fall 1992, he incorporated the company in October 1992, and the manufacturer 
produced the first boats by April 1993. During these extremely busy months, Farrow also established 
a complex set of relationships with his suppliers. With capitalization of just over $100,000, he 
launched his company. 
 
In December 1993, Farrow welcomed Dale Vetter as a partner. With a background in 
engineering and a B.S. in business, Vetter had held the responsibility for operations (manufacturing, 
logistics, and quality) in Groundwater Technology. During the fall of 1993, Farrow had talked 
frequently with Vetter about logistical questions. Anticipating the sale of Vetter’s division Farrow 
had been urging Vetter to join forces with him since October. The marriage was a good one: Farrow 
had responsibility for financial matters and sales, and Vetter handled manufacturing and logistics. 
Vetter described himself as thriving on detail; Farrow had the vision. Furthermore, Vetter was happy 
  -6- UVA-ENT-0027 
 
to move from a steadily worsening circumstance to a high-energy situation working with someone 
he respected and trusted. The partners had a contract that determined compensation and that could 
be renegotiated on a yearly basis. 
 
 
Setting Up the Company 
 
Manufacturing 
 
Farrow knew that the key link would be the manufacturer who would actually mold the new 
kayak. When he and Vetter were with Groundwater Technology they had engaged a molder, Hardigg 
Industries in South Deerfield, Massachusetts (a two-hour drive from Walden’s location). ORS, the 
Groundwater Technology division Farrow had run, had been the first business to approach Hardigg 
with an environmental product. Hardigg, a company with twenty-five years experience in molding 
plastics, was one of only a dozen American companies using rotomolding machines large enough to 
produce kayaks. Of those twelve, only five took on custom work; the only one of the five located in 
the northeast was Hardigg. The rotomold technology created a boat in one piece and a uniform color. 
The metal mold opened lengthwise like an envelope and was filled with plastic powder. The 
equipment was then placed into an oven and rotated. As the powder melted it coated the mold. 
Taken out of the oven after a precise length of time and at a set temperature, the mold continued to 
rotate as the plastic cooled and solidified. This technology was typical in the kayak business. 
 
In the fall of 1992, recession pressures combined with a drop in military contracts had 
created excess capacity for Hardigg. Joe Strzegowski was responsible for building up custom 
business, which would make use of that capacity and relieve Hardigg from its historical 99% 
reliance on defense contractors. Typically, custom clients paid for the cost of new molds up front. 
This could be a significant initial sum with the cost of subsequent production less of an investment 
binder. 
 
After talking with Farrow, Strzegowski knew that the typical transaction, based on current 
production techniques and a high up-front price for the first molded piece, would not suffice. 
Strzegowski listened to Farrow’s plans and his hopes for the product and was impressed with his 
knowledge and openness to input. They crafted an exception to the typical arrangement, a flexible 
two-year agreement, closer to an understanding than a legal document. Rather than charge a 
prohibitively large amount for the first kayak and then taper off the cost of subsequent units, Hardigg 
would share the start-up cost with Walden Paddlers. Balancing out the agreement, Hardigg made a 
$200,000 capital investment in new technology to produce the innovative kayaks. The agreement 
allowed each party an escape clause should volume targets not be realized; it also included two-year 
non-compete language. Finally, since Farrow was determined to increase the percentage of recycled 
material in the boats, he agreed to absorb the additional costs of that effort with both parties agreeing 
to share the savings realized. This three-page understanding enabled Walden Paddlers to start 
business. Hardigg, by being unusually flexible, had created a new and potentially growing customer 
for the company’s custom business. Extra support came from the son of Hardigg’s founder, a 
committed white-water kayaker who had tried in the past to get the company involved in kayak 
manufacturing.  
  -7- UVA-ENT-0027 
 
Over time, Farrow realized the fit with Hardigg made sense from another angle. Hardigg was 
a special kind of company with a long history in its community. Compared to many company 
owners, the founder was advanced in his management thinking and in his commitment to his 
employees’ quality of life. Employees were seen as partners and the company was in it for the long 
haul with both employees and partner-customers. Farrow, who shared these values called Hardigg “a 
blue chip partner.” Hardigg offered 60-day terms and Walden paid on the 59th day, without 
exception. These practices, combined with the win-win collaboration on new products, resulted in a 
high degree of trust between the two companies. This trust translated into real dollar savings for 
Walden, because Hardigg would hold inventory for Farrow.  
 
Product design 
 
At the same time that negotiations were underway with Hardigg, Farrow was looking for a 
designer to assist with the technical specifications of the kayak. After meeting with no success in 
contacting engineering departments in the Boston area’s major technical universities, he asked his 
brother-in-law if he had any suggestions. The brother-in-law, who was working toward his doctorate 
in materials engineering at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) in Troy, New York, put Farrow in 
touch with one of his professors, Steve Winckler. Winckler was considered one of the foremost 
materials scientists in the country and understood Farrow’s objectives and concerns. He introduced 
Farrow to Jeff Allott, his partner in a company called General Composites based in Clifton Park, 
New York. Allott was fascinated by the challenge of designing Walden’s kayak, his enthusiasm 
driven by his own passion for canoeing and his practical knowledge of the performance 
characteristics Farrow sought. The timing was good for General Composite’s business as well. 
Winckler and Allott were trying to reposition their firm away from defense and aerospace revenues 
toward sporting goods, an area in which both their hearts lay. They too were impressed with 
Farrow’s homework on the market and his financial skills. They saw him as sharp, passionate about 
his goals, and eager to learn. 
 
After several lengthy phone conversations, in October 1992 Farrow drove to New York to 
meet Allott for the first time. They agreed on design features and set up a schedule that would spread 
Farrow’s payments out over the eight months from design to final production. Two-thirds of the 
payment was pegged to milestones such as the design of the first and second prototypes and approval 
of the first product out of the mold. In that way, Allott was tied into the whole process, an 
arrangement that enabled both sides to continuously learn and adapt their plans. The final third of 
Allott’s payment would come as a fixed unit royalty on each boat sold. Because of his personal 
interest in the initiative, Allott also agreed to be a sales representative for Walden Paddlers in upstate 
New York and Vermont, a natural fit as he was well connected with the regional white-water racing 
community in those areas. Allott’s level of commitment became clear following an electrical fire 
that burned General Composite’s shop to the ground just a week after Farrow and he had signed their 
agreement. In order to complete the design on time, Allott worked long hours from November to 
January out of his house. The actual prototypes had to be built at another shop several hours away, 
and Allott drove through the harsh New England winter several times a week to complete the 
construction.  
  -8- UVA-ENT-0027 
 
Materials 
 
During the same time period, and after many efforts and dead-ends, Farrow established a 
connection with Clearvue Plastics in Amsterdam, New York, a vendor of recycled plastics made 
from industrial and consumer waste. Clearvue, a small firm, had a reputation for being open to new 
ideas. Farrow and Strzegowski convinced Clearvue to produce a high-quality plastic pellet that 
previously no one had thought technically feasible. To do so Clearvue had to meet Walden’s quality, 
consistency, and color requirements and also maintain a consistent melt index (the temperature at 
which the plastic would melt). 
 
Walden’s first two kayaks used a twin-wall construction, which combined a virgin plastic 
outer skin (LDPE) with a recycled foam core consisting of a combination of 30% post-consumer 
HDPE (milk bottles) and 70% postindustrial LDPE (factory trim scrap). Using virgin material on the 
outside reduced the tendency of the boat to adhere to the manufacturer’s mold and allowed a wider 
choice of colors. Both Strzegowski and Farrow were active in the selection of pellets, learning 
together each step of the way. 
 
Marketing and sales 
 
By April 1993, the prototypes had been tested and boats were emerging from Hardigg’s 
molds in western Massachusetts, just seven months after Farrow had started writing his business 
plan. Farrow’s strategy was to approach a small number of leading retailers. He had already 
introduced the concept of his kayaks to dealers such as Eastern Mountain Sports (EMS). Now he 
was able to offer them test boats. Because of his low cost production process, he could offer dealers 
a margin ten percentage points higher than the competition. Farrow prepared a clean and 
straightforward brochure for retailers and gave them demonstration boats for thirty days to test, sell, 
or take apart. He only asked that at the end of thirty days they either pay for them or return them. 
The strategy worked. EMS, a leading national outdoor equipment retailer with forty-seven stores in 
the eastern United States, was very interested after receiving the demo boats. Soon after, Farrow 
headed to Recreational Equipment Inc. (REI), the leading retailer on the west coast with thirty-six 
stores and a long and successful history of catalog sales. By May 1993, L.L. Bean had picked up the 
kayak. Farrow also turned to a hotbed of kayaking, the Charles River Canoe and Kayak organization 
in Newton, Massachusetts to invite kayakers to trial test the boats and feed future design suggestions 
back into Walden. He buttressed these initiatives by establishing a relationship with IMTRA, a New 
Bedford, Massachusetts wholesale marine distributor that sent Walden boats out into its network of 
1,600 dealers. He also contacted Boy Scout camps and sent boats with superficial flaws to YMCA 
camp organizations. 
 
As retailers ordered more boats, the logic of the relationships became more visible. Walden 
offered a compact product line and a flexible order system that enabled dealers to keep low 
inventory. In addition, Walden’s business values and culture matched those of the dealers. 
Companies like REI, L.L. Bean, and EMS emphasized environmental responsibility and used it as 
strong selling point. Perhaps even more so than their customers, these companies’ managements 
were committed to environmentally responsible products. Because of this they were willing to make 
helpful suggestions as partners in an environmental vision. Farrow quickly learned from them and 
tailored his products and practices to their needs, locking up these accounts in a relatively short 
  -9- UVA-ENT-0027 
 
period. EMS became an especially valuable source of information about retail behavior. While 
Farrow thought of his kayaks as the lowest-cost products, the dealer told him emphatically not to 
have lowest cost at retail because the second product up the price category was usually the biggest 
seller. At EMS’s suggestion, he took the retail price of his first kayak up from $329 to $399. Walden 
also produced a video to reach customers through its key retailers. Because the typical retail store 
had a high annual turnover of salespeople (many high school and college students who worked for 
two to three months), Walden’s challenge was to communicate the kayaks’ unique features directly 
to customers in some 200 retail locations. The video shown inside the stores demonstrated the 
design, performance, and safety features of the Walden kayaks, and enabled Walden to reach 
through the stores to their customers. By 1995, 250 retail dealers sold Walden’s kayaks. Reaching 
the EMS and REI stores that carried boats enabled Walden to cover a considerable portion of the 
market. Those two companies sold an estimated 10 to 20% of all kayaks in North America. See 
Exhibit 2 for a copy of the company’s sales brochure. 
 
Company mission 
 
Farrow’s commitment to the product, his willingness to learn and adapt, and his business 
know-how all contributed to the positive reception he received as he contacted the various players. 
But the company’s formal mission statement, articulated in October 1993, also helped prospective 
partners to understand and evaluate this newcomer. When he visited the headquarters of Ben and 
Jerry’s, a successful and growing socially responsible ice-cream maker, he read the company 
mission statement hanging on the wall. Farrow then decided to put his vision for Walden Paddlers 
into a statement that could be clearly understood. The Company Mission was straightforward: 
 
Walden Paddlers
tm
 is dedicated to three simple objectives: 
 
 First, to help more people pursue the healthy outdoor pleasures of paddling, so they can 
enjoy Nature and help to preserve it for our children. 
 Second, to divert waste from the landfills of our towns by making it into high quality, high 
value, useful, reusable/recyclable products. 
 Third, to provide a decent living for our company’s family and those of its affiliated 
companies, dealers, and suppliers. 
 
By 1995, Hardigg was making over 3,000 boats—up from 2,000 boats in 1994—at a cost to 
Walden of less than $100 per boat. Being able to sell at a higher price than he originally planned 
enabled Farrow not only to generate the revenues he had projected, but to attain higher profitability. 
As Walden’s distribution experience grew, so did new opportunities for environmentally responsible 
product features. Walden’s unprecedented environmental product design extended to the kayak’s 
storage bag. Kayaks arrived at the retailers in attractive bright colored storage bags that could be 
purchased as part of the product and reused to store either the kayak or other items. The goal was to 
avoid using packaging that created landfill-destined waste. In Farrow’s words, “A cardboard box 
would have added $10 to the freight cost, someone’s having to pay for its removal, and it ends up in 
a landfill. It doesn’t make sense.” Half the dealers sent the colored shipping/storage bags back to be 
reused on future boats. (Walden could get a dozen turns out of these.) Other dealers sold the new 
bags or gave them away for promotional purposes. 
  -10- UVA-ENT-0027 
 
Product line 
 
The first kayak model, the Naturalist, was built in the spring of 1993 and sold for $399. The 
Naturalist was ten feet long (305 cm.), 27 inches wide (69 cm.), 13 inches tall (33 cm.), and weighed 
34 pounds (16 kg.), light enough for most children over twelve to carry. The cockpit featured a 
comfortable full back bucket seat that could be detached for camp use. Key to the design was the 
superior tracking (a measure of how straight the kayak moved when paddled through still water). 
This boat was followed by the Walden Experience, which added a nylon spray skirt that could be 
wrapped around the paddler’s waist to protect against rain, and deck rigging consisting of a one-half 
inch bungee cord that crossed the kayak to secure the skirt or hold a jacket. The boats could be 
ordered in forest green, blue, or yellow. For $40, the sturdy recyclable plastic zippered cover bag 
mentioned above provided an effective protection for the kayak on car roof racks. The cockpits were 
designed for easy entry and exit and the hull design provided stability for performance in the water 
and for getting in and out of the boat. The promotional brochure, produced on unbleached beige 
paper with dark green lettering, promised quality, toughness, beauty, and value for the dollar for a 
boat that contained more than 50% recycled content. The company pledged in the literature to work 
toward kayaks constructed entirely of recycled and recyclable materials.  
 
By December 1994, Walden was “buried in orders for the spring” with Hardigg busy 
producing for the 1995 season. Because Farrow was operating only with Vetter, he kept the number 
of sales accounts low. By maintaining only a small number of key strategic accounts Farrow was 
able to talk to all his clients bi-monthly, and had virtually daily contact with EMS and REI stores. 
The constant communication allowed him to provide just-in-time inventory.  He always kept a small 
buffer stock to exchange colors and at least 25% additional inventory was readily accessible should 
an account ask for additional kayaks. By the end of 1994, after several months of cultivating  
key relationships, Farrow reflected on the pattern he could see. He called it his four-point transaction 
test and applied it to the relationships he had and to the ones he wanted to create. 
 
 Clear mission 
 Clear expectations 
 Mutual benefits 
 Trust 
 
 
New Product in 1995 
 
In January 1995, Walden introduced the Vision, a bigger kayak made for more experienced 
paddlers. Targeted toward a different market niche, the Vision was a versatile, light, and affordable 
twelve-and-one-half-foot touring boat. Marketed as a new concept in kayaks, this compact boat 
handled as well as the fifteen-foot touring kayaks and had a strong ability for tracking, accelerating, 
and gliding. A new seat and foot brace system accommodated a wide range of paddler heights 
without compromising performance. It included amenities such as a water bottle loop, map holder, 
and a tray for sunglasses, flares, or wallets. The Vision could be used in up to level 2 rivers with flat, 
fast-moving water because it had a keel and therefore could track easily through such water. The 
  -11- UVA-ENT-0027 
 
kayaks made for rougher conditions had no keels on the bottom of the hull, enabling them to move 
quickly in any direction. 
 
Allott from General Composites designed the Vision, but Hardigg did not have the 
capabilities to serve again as the manufacturer. Hardigg was experienced in rotomolding but not in 
the thermoforming technology required for the new boat. After talking with several manufacturers 
within reasonable distance, Walden began working with Universal (Walden continued to work with 
Hardigg on rotomolding technology), a 60-year-old company located in Chicopee, an hour and a half 
from West Concord. Universal had extensive experience with thermoform production and knew of 
Hardigg’s experience with Walden Paddlers. Walden explained the quality, materials consistency, 
and color requirements they needed.  
 
Universal was looking for bigger capacity and new products. They were somewhat unusual 
in their industry in their willingness to take on new projects, experiment and take the initiative where 
others might shy away. They were opportunistic and flexible and saw Walden Paddlers’ business as 
an opportunity to learn and to expand their products. Even though they could not pay off the cost of 
the machine on Walden’s business alone, Universal invested about $200,000 in a new machine for 
the mold. This equipment held the mold, heated the plastic sheet, and pulled the plastic to the mold 
for the forming process. Walden paid the full price of the new molds that were required. 
 
Thermoform technology molded one-half of the boat at a time. A flat piece of plastic was 
heated up and pulled over on top of a boat mold that then sucked the plastic down into the mold. The 
top and bottom were made at Universal and then brought to the West Concord Walden facility where 
a seat with foot braces was installed in the hull and the two sides were joined and sealed, and a 
decorative strip was placed over the seal. One advantage to the thermomolding technique was that 
the top could be made of one color and the bottom another. This enabled Walden to make the Vision 
look like the much higher-priced fiberglass racing kayaks. The efficient performance and smaller 
cockpit were suited to the more aggressive and advanced paddler Walden was trying to attract. The 
Vision sold for $629 at retail and was the first kayak Walden had made of 100% recycled  
materials. Walden described the new product as “a kayak that looks and acts like the high priced 
touring boats, but delivers on the Walden Paddlers’ mission of excellent value and maximum 
environmental responsibility.”  
 
Farrow started a newsletter in the fall of 1994 to stay in touch with people who had 
purchased Walden kayaks. Sent quarterly, these friendly communications on the front and back of 
one page brought readers up to date on the company’s growth, publicity, and new product 
information and schedules; it also invited customers to provide feedback and suggestions for 
improving the kayaks. The Company Mission was included and the company’s environmental 
commitment was consistently reinforced.  
 
 
Virtual Corporation 
 
By 1995, INC Magazine, the Boston Globe, Esquire, and other publications had cited Walden 
Paddlers as a prime example of a virtual corporation for the 1990s. NBC’s Today Show interviewed 
Farrow, emphasizing the Walden’s concern for the environment and its unique features as a virtual 
  -12- UVA-ENT-0027 
 
corporation. A virtual corporation had no employees; it operated successfully by farming out key 
functions to specialized firms rather than managing those same functions in-house. A virtual 
corporation outsourced, often through flexible and informal subcontracts, as many tasks as possible, 
and devoted itself primarily to coordinating all the various activities. This arrangement eliminated 
the need for investments in fixed assets and kept overhead low. It also resulted in a flexible network 
organization of suppliers and customers that could adapt to the market and that could be highly 
productive when the alliance relationships were managed well. 
 
It was a fact that Walden operated in an unusual way. Until December 1993, when Vetter 
joined the company, Walden consisted of Paul Farrow. In August 1995, the company had two 
partners, but still no payroll. As the company’s sales grew Farrow and Vetter could not handle 
everything themselves. To help with final preparation of the kayaks for transportation from West 
Concord, two full-time people were leased from Friday Management Company in Framingham, 
Massachusetts, a town within an hour’s drive of Concord. Farrow’s son Ben also helped during the 
summers readying the kayaks for transport. In addition, a relatively young retired executive from 
Dun and Bradstreet, who was also an active canoeist and kayaker, was available to help with crisis 
deadlines. But through the leasing of employees, Friday Management became another relationship in 
the network web. The firm handled Walden’s entire payroll and personnel functions, an arrangement 
that was ideal for the fledgling firm that could now “hire” two people for considerably less per week 
than it would have cost to hire and pay benefits in-house. Friday Management was managing 
approximately 18,000 people in 1995, so it could get good insurance and health rates for its people. 
Both sides saw the attractiveness of the partnership. Farrow and Vetter could select the people they 
wanted, train them, and then put them on Friday Management’s payroll. Thus far, the arrangement 
with those hired had worked out fine. 
 
What motivated Paul Farrow to start as a virtual corporation? “It was so much faster,” he 
recollected. He did, however, express some caution about managing a virtual corporation: “The 
downside is that it means you are constantly selling.” He went on,  
 
It shows you the difference between a large corporation and someone like Walden 
Paddlers. The large firms are run to a large extent on control, power, and fear. I can’t 
use fear, power, or any traditional form of explicit control. I have to help people 
believe in what we are doing, find ways to get them to buy in. You have to be willing 
to hear “no” over and over—yet still keep going. 
 
 
Conditions in Late 1995 
 
By August 1995, Walden Paddlers was struggling to keep its 250 North American retailers 
stocked as demand continued longer into the season than Farrow had anticipated. The sustained 
inventory demand was driven in part by a late summer that extended from the Rocky Mountains to 
the West Coast. The region had experienced snow late the previous spring, then a late spring, and 
was now still feeling the effects of that winter in its waterways with some rivers still moving so fast 
they couldn’t be used for recreational paddling. To service distant accounts more satisfactorily, the 
company had added a sales representative who covered the West from Washington state to Mexico. 
A former editor of Paddler magazine, the rep was well connected, although most accounts were 
  -13- UVA-ENT-0027 
 
small, and volume was not substantial compared with East Coast sales. Shipping had presented a 
cost problem but Vetter had arranged to pack 50 to 100 boats into containers that they filled 
themselves at the West Concord facility. This had brought the transportation expenses down 
considerably.  
 
Sales of the new Vision touring kayak, introduced the previous December, were doing well. 
Customers loved its paddling ability; it was a logical step up from the Naturalist for the less 
seasoned but advancing kayaker. Vetter complained in August 1995, “I never have inventory.” Due 
in large measure to REI’s and EMS’s successful efforts, over 500 Vision kayaks had sold already, 
exceeding Farrow’s sales projections. 
 
Overall sales had been enhanced in the summer of 1995 by substantial demand from Canada. 
Distribution was possible through agreements with Mountain Equipment Coop and Mid-Canada 
Fiberglass. The latter made fiberglass canoes that they shipped to the United States. Their trucks 
would deliver the canoes to distribution points in the United States and return with Walden’s kayaks, 
which they, in turn, would distribute through their dealers in Canada. Indeed, because that market 
held such potential for the company, Farrow attended the Canada Outdoor Retailer Market show in 
September. 
 
By this time, Farrow and Vetter had converted the Naturalist to 100% recycled plastic 
content. They had tested plastic materials in the fall of 1994 and resolved the cracking problems that 
first appeared. By January 1995, all the bugs were worked out and they began molding and shipping 
the 100% kayak in March. This objective had been reached only through determined persistence. 
Vetter described their attitudes: “You can’t compromise on these goals, finding the right cost, 
vendor, materials. You can’t take no for an answer. If you keep saying it enough times you can get 
the vendors to believe. It is too late [on environmental issues] to compromise, it will happen, people 
will come around.” An example of their uncompromising environmental stance with suppliers was 
the position they took with New England Foam, who supplied foam foot braces and foam pads 
inserted under the seats. The company was sending their products to Walden Paddlers’ facility in 
thick cardboard paper packaging that Walden had to dispose of. Vetter declined to accept the 
packages and told New England Foam that they had to take their boxes back or they could find 
another customer. “You have to take that attitude,” he said. “You can’t accept that this is the way it 
is, you have to insist on change. You have to demand that things change.” By 1995, New England 
Foam was delivering its product in large cardboard boxes, taking the foam out, and carrying the 
boxes back to their factory to be reused until they deteriorated and could be recycled.  
 
Walden Paddlers success was having an effect on the industry. While there was still no direct 
competition in New England, the competition elsewhere was heating up. Old Town Canoe was now 
producing kayaks and had introduced a competitive boat similar to the Naturalist at the same price 
point. The Outdoor Retailers Show in Reno in mid-August proved Walden Paddlers’ boats had 
attracted attention. Perception/Aquaterra, the largest competitor and sales leader, introduced two 
new models at the show that competed directly with the Naturalist and the Vision.  
 
Yet the new products were not just a response to Walden. In 1995, the National Sporting 
Goods Association reported a 32% growth in canoe use (the number included kayaks), ranking it the 
third-fastest growing sport behind roller blading and roller hockey. Canoe magazine’s publisher, 
  -14- UVA-ENT-0027 
 
who visited every kayak manufacturer at the show, noted that anecdotal reports indicated a 35% to 
60% increase in production. (Precise industry statistics were difficult to get since all the 
manufacturers were privately owned.) The increased use of canoes and kayaks was only one part of 
the larger trend toward outdoor activity. The National Hiking Society reported that over 70 million 
people in the United States and Canada had recently participated in “an outdoor adventure.” 
Numerous trend indicators suggested a continued upward climb in public participation in outdoor 
sports and activities connected with the natural environment. On a broader societal level, public 
opinion was strongly in support of a clean and healthy environment that could be enjoyed by 
grandchildren, with the younger generation, the so-called “Generation-X,” particularly concerned 
about environmental issues.  
 
With Vetter’s attention to logistics and efficiencies, the company had a simple yet sound 
distribution system. Originally, Farrow had carried the kayaks from Hardigg in his own vehicle. 
Realizing that this arrangement could not continue, they had looked at common carriers to transport 
the boats from the manufacturer to their firm and then to retailers. The typical common-carrier cost 
of a run to Hardigg and back was $400 to $450. Vetter designed a cart that enabled trucks to carry 
more boats per load: the cart could move a larger number of boats to Hardigg’s dock in a single trip, 
and the entire unit could then be set easily into the truck. Seventy-two boats could be put on the 
truck in fifteen minutes with the cart system, a process that had shown steady cost improvement as it 
was refined. Palmer Trucking, who agreed to use the carts, was able to transport a full load of kayaks 
from Hardigg and return with the empty carts for $230 per run. Vetter estimated average 
transportation costs of $3 per boat. Once the kayaks arrived at the Walden warehouse, they were 
shipped to the dealers: local retailers provided their own transportation and out-of-town retailers 
used common carriers. Walden had an arrangement with a Florida warehouse for distribution in that 
region, paying a fee to the warehouse manager to ship from that location.  
 
Rapid growth had forced the firm to move from its first facility in Acton, Massachusetts to 
West Concord. In September 1995, they moved to a location 400 yards away that gave them three 
times the square footage. Here they finally had real office space and an assembly area separate from 
their warehouse, so that they would not unnecessarily heat and cool inventory in order to keep 
temperatures comfortable for work.   
  
The recycled plastics market was evolving rapidly in the 1990s. Just a few years before, 
everyone in the plastics business had said that recycled materials could not compete structurally with 
virgin plastics. Furthermore, buyers had said they could not trust the quality of the stream of material 
and that reliable vendors were impossible to find. Walden Paddlers had already bucked common 
wisdom by setting high standards for its materials content and by finding dependable vendors who 
were willing to help Walden build its business because Walden was willing to service them as a 
customer. 
 
The president of Perception/Aquaterra had purchased a Walden Paddlers’ kayak 
surreptitiously to check out the new competitor. But Farrow was not focused on his competitors or 
interested in going up against the large players for a share of the market. His objective was to open 
up the market. This would only happen if more people were enticed into trying an introductory 
kayak and had a good experience. 
  -15- UVA-ENT-0027 
 
The Alternatives in Late 1995 
 
Farrow knew what his options were, but he didn’t know which one to pick—nor could he 
clearly establish a strategic rationale for choosing any of them. He could keep the firm’s operations 
compact and focused on his original vision of providing high performance, reasonably priced kayaks 
for novice users. Gradual growth to $5 million in sales with continuous design improvements but a 
limited line of boats could provide a comfortable life for Farrow and Vetter. They could gradually 
expand internationally. Conversations with some Japanese distributors were underway; REI had 
already distributed Walden’s boats in Japan. But the size and nature of this market were unclear. 
There were no manufacturers in Japan and boats sold for from two to four times the price paid in the 
United States and Canada. Boot sales indicated that the Japanese had embraced hiking, but would 
there be a similar expansion of demand for other types of outdoor equipment?  
 
Alternatively, Walden could fill out the product line in North America, bring in more capital, 
perhaps giving up equity, and broaden distribution aggressively to catalogs. The Vision model 
appeared to be successful. Walden could continue its move up from the less experienced paddler and 
make upper-end products, including white-water kayaks, for the more advanced enthusiast. 
  
The company had challenged accepted thinking about using recycled plastics for kayak 
production. The partners could see other possibilities for using recycled materials. They even had 
some specific ideas about new products made from recycled plastic. Vetter was looking at product 
design issues for these while Farrow focused on markets. This would be consistent with the firm’s 
commitment to grow the market for recycled materials. One thing they had learned in the past four 
years was that people were unlikely to pay more for environmentally responsible products. If the 
product was not price and quality competitive, it was not going to sell. Should they put new outdoorrelated
products through the distribution pipelines already set up, or should they create new products 
for new markets and distribute them through other channels that they would develop in the same 
way that Farrow had for Walden’s kayaks? If they were going to try their ideas for new outdoor 
equipment, they had to move quickly. Product samples needed to be in the retailers’ hands by the 
end of November or early December to allow for production and shipping by late spring 1996. 
Regardless of the specific products, they were committed to continuing the low overhead strategy of 
collaborative efforts with other firms. At all costs they wished to avoid evolving into a bureaucratic 
giant consumed by detail and overhead. Each path they were considering held potential for financial 
success and personal satisfaction. Each also involved tradeoffs and significant challenges.  
 
  -16- UVA-ENT-0027 
 
Exhibit 1 
WALDEN PADDLERS 
Walden 
 
Henry David Thoreau (1817-1862), writer, poet, and philosopher, is recognized as one of the 
outstanding American social and political thinkers. His most famous works include Walden and his 
famous essay “Civil Disobedience.” Walden was an intellectual and spiritual exploration based on 
his two-year solitary residence at Walden Pond, a small body of water surrounded by natural 
wilderness close to the town of Concord, Massachusetts. Concerned with society becoming rapidly 
urban and industrial, Thoreau held to a life shaped by inner principles and nurtured by the natural 
world. He called for individuals to be authentic, to follow their ideals and create unique life styles, 
making living itself an art. He was a naturalist in the sense that nature was his field of action, his 
spiritual base, and a source of inspiration. “Civil Disobedience,” his most famous essay, expressed 
his defense of the private conscience against majority opinion and shallow expediency that lacked 
basis in moral principle. “In a restless expanding society dedicated to practical action, he 
demonstrated the uses and values of leisure, contemplation, and a harmonious appreciation of an 
coexistence with nature.”1 Thoreau was also a handyman, appreciated in his community for his 
work, and a gifted boat builder. He also successfully turned around his family’s failing pencil 
business. 
                                                 
1 Taken from the WEB listing for Henry David Thoreau, Encyclopedia Britannica, 1995. 
 UVA-ENT-0027 
 
-17- 
Exhibit 2  
WALDEN PADDLERS 
Company Brochure 
 
 
 UVA-ENT-0027 
 
-18- 
 
 Exhibit 2 (continued) 
 
 
 
