Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 145 Chapter 5 A Home Windswept with Paradox I think that’s why I so love Great Salt Lake. Every day when I look out at that lake, I think, ‘Ah, paradox’—a body of water that no one can drink. It’s the liquid lie of the desert. But I think we have those paradoxes within us and certainly the whole idea of home is windswept with paradox. —Terry Tempest Williams Why write about the dead? Because the dead are alive in us, and in our face. —Nancy K. Miller, Bequest and Betrayal During the late twentieth century, two Mormon women’s autobiogra- phies gained widespread attention in the United States. Journalist Deborah Laake’s Secret Ceremonies: A Mormon Woman’s Intimate Diary of Marriage and Beyond became a “sizzling” New York Times best seller when it was published in 1993. Laake’s story offers readers access to “shocking” insider information about Mormon temple ceremonies and the “graphic” details of a disaffected Mormon woman’s sexual mis-edu- cation, depressions, divorces, and eventual departure from her Mormon faith.1 In contrast to the sensationalism of Laake’s Secret Ceremonies, Terry Tempest Williams’s Refuge: An Unnatural History of Family and Place captured the attention of a national readership with its environ- mental message and moving account of a mother’s death from ovarian cancer. Williams attributes multiple instances of breast cancer among her Utah family members to their exposure to above-ground nuclear testing in Nevada during the 1950s. Interlocking the personal story of her mother’s death with a scientific account of the flooding of the Bear River Migratory Bird Refuge by the Great Salt Lake, Williams succeeds 145 Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 146 146 Faithful Transgressions in the American West in writing the first twentieth-century Mormon woman’s autobiography to achieve broad national appeal and critical scholarly attention. In her comprehensive overview of Williams’s work included in American Nature Writers, Lorraine Anderson astutely summarizes the major themes of Refuge, observing that “[i]t represents Williams’s attempt to heal herself through story, as she writes in the prologue, but it also reads as a historical record of natural cataclysm, a meditation on mortality and death, an exploration of a woman’s identity as it is shaped by family and place, and a challenge to cultural and religious orthodoxies” (983). Similar to Laake, Williams no longer identifies herself as an orthodox Mormon woman. She also uses her autobiographical writing to criticize what she views as many Mormons’ often blind religious obedience to the hierarchy of male church authority. Different from Laake, however, Williams attempts to construct the narrative in such a way that it works to balance her criticism with continuing respect for her pioneer heritage. Unable to break all connection with her Mormon past, she writes, “In Mormon culture that is one of the things you do know—history and gene- ology [sic]. I come from a family with deep roots in the American West” (13). Besides giving credit to her Mormon ancestors, Williams writes an extensive, six-page acknowledgments section in which she describes her book as a “collaborative project” (291) and, for their “web of concern” (292), she thanks numerous individual Mormon family and community members with whom she maintains close ties (291–97). Although she will always be connected to her Mormon community, she refers to herself as a “radical soul in a conservative religion.” Describing the multiple ways that Williams “is an embodiment of paradox,” a woman writer and naturalist who does not fit easily into her religious community, Anderson observes, “She is . . . a feminist in a patriarchal religion, an environmentalist in one of the very few American religions that in the 1990s has not embraced ecological values, a woman who has been arrested for civil disobedience in a religion that holds obedience to civil authority as an article of faith, a childless woman in a pronatalist religion” (973). Given her difficult position in the church, Williams does not con- demn the church outright or criticize specific LDS Church leaders by name as Laake and Stenhouse do in their life writing. She does, howev- er, take explicit issue with what she views as Mormon beliefs or practices that promote unquestioning submission to these leaders’ authority. “In Mormon culture,” she writes, “authority is respected, obedience is revered, and independent thinking is not. I was taught as a young girl Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 147 A Home Windswept with Paradox 147 not to ‘make waves’ or ‘rock the boat’” (285). As an adult woman, Williams decides to “rock the boat” in Refuge. Yet she still remains part of her Mormon community, formerly working as the naturalist-in-resi- dence at the Utah Museum of Natural History and living with her equally unorthodox Mormon husband, Brooke, at the mouth of Salt Lake City’s Emigration Canyon, near the site of the monument where Brigham Young first told Latter-day Saint pioneers they had arrived at their final destination. Thus, both Williams’s personal and professional life keep her connected to her Mormon roots. “My ancestors were part of these original ‘handcart companies’ in the 1850s,” she explains. “With faith, they would endure. . . . It was a small sacrifice in the name of religious freedom. Almost one hundred and fifty years later, we are still here” (13). Having earned degrees in science and English, Williams defines her- self as a professional naturalist and writer. To date, she has published thirteen books and numerous articles that have grown out of her per- sonal and professional experience as a naturalist and ecofeminist.2 She is, as Anderson explains, determined to “see the world whole, with the eyes of a poet as well as a scientist” (983). Her book now appears on the syllabi of many courses in women’s studies, environmental studies, auto- biographical writing, and the American West. The text itself resists classification within a single literary or disciplinary genre because Williams’s writing blurs boundaries between science and literature, non- fiction and fiction, prose and poetry, and individual, family, community, and environmental history. “The birds and I share a natural history,” writes Williams. “It is a matter of rootedness, of living inside a place for so long that the mind and imagination fuse” (21). In addition to writing that she is unable to separate the landscape of Utah and the Bird Refuge from the landscape of her family (40), she constructs a personal narra- tive that attempts to accommodate multiple belief systems and philoso- phies. Her autobiographical act is informed, for example, by her aca- demic background and personal interest in science, literature, Native American studies, ornithology, ecology, Buddhism, feminism, environ- mentalism, transcendentalism, civil disobedience, passive resistance, and Western Christian religious traditions such as Mormonism and Catholicism. She intersperses her story with numerous allusions to diverse ideas, philosophies, and systems of belief, thereby attempting to show that her perspective is enriched by many ideologies but that she herself adheres strictly to none. Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 148 148 Faithful Transgressions in the American West Despite Williams’s resistance to religious orthodoxy, the themes and rhetorical intentions of her book draw on a long hortatory tradition in American literature. According to Daniel B. Shea in Spiritual Autobiography in Early America, “[m]ost American autobiography from Taylor through Franklin to Henry Adams has aimed at some form of edi- fication. At least it has framed an argument, a recommendation, a spe- cial plea of some sort. Indeed, ours has been a notably sermon-ridden lit- erature from the beginning” (94). Although Williams’s narrative should not be reduced to mere homily, she herself would not deny that Refuge intends to edify, inspire, and persuade both Mormon and non-Mormon readers alike to accept her arguments. In other words, despite the obvi- ous literary craft required to produce such a complex text, she did not construct the story for its own sake. On the contrary, she uses narrative art to educate, to raise people’s environmental and feminist conscious- ness, and to provoke action. As Karla Armbruster points out, “Williams’s work reveals her awareness . . . that she is actively creating discourse that takes into account her own history and culture, but that can also work to change her culture.” (212). Writing a lyrical account of losing her mother to cancer and watch- ing her beloved bird refuge flood, Williams constructs the story in order to achieve three specific ends. First, she means to call a stop to nuclear testing and similar human exploitation of the environment, such as Utah legislators’ elaborate plan to control or “tame” (92) the Great Salt Lake through an expensive water pumping project (247). Second, she intends to point out lessons that the natural world has to teach human beings about diversity, adaptability, and survival. And third, she aims to exorcise the pain of tragic loss through writing her family’s story, affirm- ing relationships among people close to her who also suffered from Diane Tempest’s death. “Buddha says there are two kinds of suffering,” writes Williams, “the kind that leads to more suffering and the kind that brings an end to suffering” (52). Through writing, Williams works to bring closure to her own and her family’s suffering. “Perhaps, I am telling this story in an attempt to heal myself, to confront what I do not know, to create a path for myself with the idea that ‘memory is the only way home’” (4). Adopting the resolved determination of an autobiographer about to narrate her story, she admits in her prologue, “I have been in retreat. This story is my return” (4). According to theorist Nancy K. Miller, what Williams describes here is not uncommon among those who write about significant deaths in their family or about what might Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 149 A Home Windswept with Paradox 149 be gained by doing so. “Memoirs about the loss of parents show how enmeshed in the family plot we have been and the price of our complicity in its stories. The death of parents forces us to rethink our lives, to reread ourselves. We read for what we need to find. Sometimes, we also find what we didn’t know we needed” (Bequest xiii). Despite Williams’s focus on her mother’s death and the flooding of the bird refuge, her writing still falls well within the five conventions of traditional Mormon women’s autobiography, sharing much with the personal narratives of Hafen, Tanner, and Martin. However, as a profes- sional writer, Williams’s innovative work complicates the purpose, rhet- oric, and narrative style of twentieth-century Mormon women’s autobi- ographical acts, much like fellow professional writers Brooks and Barber do in their own life narratives. In particular, Williams’s writing compli- cates and extends the tradition in three main ways. First, she revises and expands the scope of Mormon women’s spiritual autobiography. Second, she explicitly privileges individual and scientific authority over ecclesi- astical authority, advocating civil and religious disobedience when nec- essary. And third, she creates in Refuge a distinctly poetic literary style. Spiritual Autobiography with a Difference Just as Hafen, Tanner, and Martin have done before her, Williams writes a spiritual autobiography. At first glance, however, her story does not look much like a conventional Mormon woman’s personal history. The narrative, for instance, is not about a quest to find God or the “right” religion. Nor is it about her need to defend or justify her Mormon faith, even though Williams continues to embrace aspects of Mormon belief, elaborating on those beliefs to contextualize her story for non-Mormon readers and to explain how Mormonism informs her perspective. “I was raised to believe in a spirit world,” writes Williams, “that life exists before the earth and will continue to exist afterward, that each human being, bird, and bulrush, along with all other life forms had a spirit life before it came to dwell physically on earth. Each occupied an assigned sphere of influence, each has a place and a purpose” (14). In this pas- sage, she explains Mormon doctrine and gives credit to her Mormon upbringing for first teaching her to revere all living things. As ecofemi- nist critic Cassandra Kircher observes, “Williams keeps one foot in Mormonism while looking often to the natural world for religious con- solation” (162). Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 150 150 Faithful Transgressions in the American West Of life in the Tempest home, where both Mormonism and the envi- ronment were respected, Williams writes, “We learned at an early age that God can be found wherever you are, especially outside. Family wor- ship was not just relegated to Sunday in a chapel” (14). Similar to other spiritual autobiographers, Williams intends to arouse readers’ minds and emotions toward God, but not necessarily, as LDS theology teaches, to an actual glorified Being who dwells in the heavens. Instead, the God that Williams constructs in Refuge—who “He” is and where spiritual seekers may find “Him”—sounds more like the God of pantheism rather than Mormonism. “In the severity of a salt desert,” writes Williams, “I am brought down to my knees by its beauty. My imagination is fired. My heart opens and my skin burns in the passion of these moments. I will have no other gods before me” (148). She immediately reenforces this view of God-in-Nature by implying that God is Nature. “Wilderness courts our souls,” claims Williams (148). Such declarations illustrate the literary influence of the work of nineteenth-century Romantic American writer Ralph Waldo Emerson on Williams’s own writing. In his transcendentalist manifesto “Nature,” for example, Emerson writes, that spirit, that is, the Supreme Being, does not build up nature around us, but puts it forth through us, as the life of the tree puts forth new branches and leaves through the pores of the old. As a plant upon the earth, so a man rests upon the bosom of God; he is nourished by unfailing fountains, and draws at his need inexhaustible power. (1033) Similar to Tanner, who writes in order to argue for a New Testament rather than an Old Testament view of God, Williams, too, lays out a revised personal theology through the pages of her autobiographical act. However, the transformation of her own system of belief goes much fur- ther than Tanner’s because she revises by incorporating many different beliefs. Following a familiar convention of Mormon autobiography, Williams recounts instances when she or her family has exercised spiritual faith and witnessed healing miracles, especially on Diane Tempest’s behalf. The larger story told in Refuge about Diane’s ultimate death, however, proves that not all blessings of healing result in the precise miracle an LDS family may pray for. When she writes about her mother being diag- nosed with breast cancer in 1971, having less than a twenty percent chance of surviving more than two years (196), Williams narrates what may be viewed as a typical, (yet miraculous) faith-promoting story of a Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 151 A Home Windswept with Paradox 151 Mormon family. In this passage, she writes that Thomas S. Monson, a high church official in Salt Lake City, promises her father that his wife would live to raise their children. Using a respectful tone, she records her recollection of his prophetic words: I feel compelled to tell you your wife will be well for many years to come. I would like to invite you and your family to kneel together in the privacy of your home at noon on Thursday. The Brethren will be meeting in the holy chambers of the Temple, where we will enter your wife’s name among those to be healed. (197) Williams then explains that as a young person, she joined in her fam- ily’s prayer vigil at the designated time. “We knelt in the living room together as a family,” she writes. “No words were uttered. But in the quiet of that room, I felt the presence of angels” (197). Her writing here implies that Monson’s promised blessing was, in fact, fulfilled in her family’s life because Diane Tempest lived much longer than the desig- nated two years that the doctors predicted; she was able to raise her chil- dren to adulthood. Other important spiritual experiences in the text occur when Williams discusses moments of formal blessings. One instance occurs early in the story where she describes a traditional blessing of healing performed for Diane by the men of her family. She shows that women also participate, but only as onlookers joined with the men in faith and prayer. Working to recreate the scene of a traditional Mormon blessing and the nature of what is said, she writes, At dusk, we moved inside to the living room and created a family circle. Mother sat on a chair in the center. As the eldest son, Steve annointed Mother with consecrated olive oil to seal the blessing. The men who held the Melchizedek Priesthood, the highest order of authority bestowed upon Mormon males, gathered around her, placing their hands on the crown of her head. My father prayed in a low, humble voice, asking that she might be the receptacle of her family’s love, that she might know of her influence in our lives and be blessed with strength and courage and peace of mind. (34–35) In contrast, her narration of a later scene, in which she, as a woman, gives her mother a blessing, recalls former times in Mormon history when such interactions were well known and accepted among women.3 Although it was common in the nineteenth century for Mormon Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 152 152 Faithful Transgressions in the American West women to write about women blessing others, especially during difficult times of pregnancy or childbirth, such accounts became much less common during the twentieth century and beyond because Mormon women offering blessings has gone mostly out of practice and definitely out of official favor.4 Ultimately, her mother asks her to give her a bless- ing, an unorthodox request from a Mormon woman, whom her daugh- ter characterizes as becoming less and less orthodox the closer she approaches death. “I return to her bedside,” says Williams. “She takes my hand and whispers, ‘Will you give me a blessing?’” (158). Then, as any Mormon writer would likely do for her outsider audience, she explains the somewhat unusual nature of her mother’s request. “In Mormon religion, formal blessings of healing are given by men through the Priesthood of God. Women have no outward authority. But within the secrecy of sisterhood we have always bestowed benisons upon our families. Mother sits up. I lay my hands upon her head and in the pri- vacy of women, we pray” (158). While contemporary Latter-day Saints are encouraged to seek spiri- tual gifts, few orthodox Mormon women today would consider blessing a family member in this way if ordained male priesthood holders were available to do so. Williams knows that her contemporary LDS audience would read such a passage and view this interaction with extreme cau- tion. However, her narration of the scene implies her desire to encour- age Mormon women’s personal authority to seek out and exercise their own spiritual powers and then to write about them in their autobiogra- phies, just as their Mormon foremothers did a century earlier. In a later interview, she remarks on the controversial passage: The fact that women give each other blessings is something that every Mormon woman knows, but we don’t share, so in speaking the unspeakable you violated some sort of trust. But I don’t feel that way because [the lan- guage of women] goes beyond Mormonism. If we are going to move forward with any sort of compassionate intelligence, it is going to be the strength of women that provides us with a lifeline. (Pearlman 124) Unlike many Mormon women autobiographers, Williams writes a spiritual autobiography that does not focus only on Mormon beliefs. She constantly interrupts her narrative with ideas from faith traditions or philosophies not her own. She quotes, for example, from the Indian teachings of Samkhya (“If you consciously hold within yourself three quarters of your power and use only one quarter to respond to any communication coming from others, you can stop the automatic, imme- Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 153 A Home Windswept with Paradox 153 diate and thoughtless movement outwards, which leaves you with a feel- ing of emptiness . . .” [168–69]), the writings of Catholic monk Thomas Merton (“Silence is the strength of our interior life. . . . If we fill our lives with silence, then we will live in hope” [193]), the Gnostics (“For what is inside of you is what is outside of you . . .” [267]), and the German-born American psychoanalyst Erich Fromm (“The whole life of the individual is nothing but the process of giving birth to himself; indeed, we should be fully born when we die” [232]). Williams also quotes numerous authors, including Emily Dickinson (“Pain prepares us for peace” [210]), Robert Hass (“You hear pain singing in the nerves of things; it is not a song” [251]), and William Auden (“Our dreams of safe- ty must disappear” [273]). Honoring the insight of spiritually minded thinkers, Williams works to show that she is inspired by many different perspectives on the human condition, not just by Mormon doctrine. Williams also expands the tradition of Mormon women’s spiritual autobiography by going outside of Mormon practice to understand and benefit from the rituals surrounding death in Native American tradi- tions, such as the Anasazi in the past (168) and the Shoshone in the present (234). Writing about her search for a way to exorcise her grief, Williams compares Native American rituals to LDS burial practices, in which the body of a Latter-day Saint is dressed in temple clothing at death. She implies that such rituals and practices possess meaning, but she contrasts them with what she describes as the “hollow” rite of a modern-day American mortician applying unnecessary and excessive makeup to her dead mother’s face (235). After her mother’s funeral, Williams continues to seek a healing rite outside of her own faith com- munity. She writes about traveling to Mexico after her mother’s death, dramatizing her participation in Mexican Catholic ceremonies sur- rounding the Day of the Dead. “I needed a ritual,” writes Williams, “a celebration to move me from death to life” (276). Her writing itself is part of that ritual act, moving her not only from death to life but toward a new sense of who she is now that her mother is gone. “The death of parents—dreaded or wished for—is a trauma that causes an invisible tear in our self-identity,” explains Miller. “In the aftermath of a parent’s death, which forces the acknowledgment of our shared mortality, loss and mourning take complex paths, since our earliest acts of identity are intimately bound up with our relation to the dead parent” (Bequest x). One key way that Refuge recalls but also revises the tradition of Mormon women’s spiritual autobiography is Williams’s repeated references to dreams and dreaming. Encouraged by her grandmother Mimi’s inter- Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 154 154 Faithful Transgressions in the American West est in Jungian dream analysis (130, 246), Williams pays particular atten- tion to the interpretation of dreams, which she, like Hafen and other early Mormon women autobiographers, often portrays as informative and prophetic. At the beginning of her book, for example, Williams draws a parallel between herself and a purple bird that she dreamed about floating in the Great Salt Lake. “I entered the lake and, with cupped hands, picked up the bird and returned it to shore. The purple bird turned gold, dropped its tail, and began digging a burrow in the white sand, where it retreated and sealed itself inside with salt” (4). In this same passage, she writes about her own “retreat” and “return” to life through writing. Relating another prophetic dream in which she hears eight black hel- icopters flying toward her family’s house, Williams foreshadows tragic events by describing the impending “danger” she felt in this dream (22). Much later in her story, she affirms what she views as the prophetic nature of this dream when she attends to her mother’s pain. “Mother mentioned this morning how much the morphine pump sounds like hel- icopters coming over the rise. Her comment stopped me, and then I remembered my own association with helicopters, the dream I had four years earlier, when all this began” (219). In his study of early American spiritual autobiography, Shea explains, “Reporting of supra-rational experiences such as dreams and visions was fairly common among Quakers, whose belief in an intuitive access to divine Truth allowed for the possibility that God might choose such a medium for revelation” (14). Viewing dreams as prophetic or revelatory is common throughout the tradition of Mormon women’s autobiographical writing as well. However, Williams’s narration and interpretation of her dreams does not make the direct claim that many other Mormon women autobiog- raphers make to having dream visions sent by God. Rather, her text implies that dreams are self-revelatory in a more abstract or mysterious way. Unlike Hafen, for instance, she does not explicitly state that her dreams are attributable to God. Ironically, one of the most important, recurring dreams that Williams narrates turns out to be based in her literal past. She writes, “I told my father that for years, as long as I could remember, I saw this flash of light in the night in the desert—that this image had so permeated my being that I could not venture south without seeing it again, on the horizon, illuminating buttes and mesas” (282–83). She tells readers that her father reveals at that moment that this was not a dream at all, but a Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 155 A Home Windswept with Paradox 155 mushroom cloud that she actually saw as a child on September 7, 1957, sitting on her mother’s lap driving through the Nevada desert. “It was at that moment,” she writes, “that I realized the deceit I had been living under” (283). What she believed to have been a dream had brought about this personal epiphany. Therefore, whether real or imagined, her text works to validate the insight individuals may attain by paying attention to their dreams. Relating and interpreting dreams is another way that Williams’s writ- ing blurs boundaries. Just as death is a primary theme of her text, refer- ences to dreams, dreaming, and sleep also permeate the book. “I never imagined we would walk to the place where what we hoped for was death,” writes Williams. “Sleep. It is the same thing” (214). In one scene, her writing focuses on the irrational and unconscious mind. In the next, however, she may explore the rational and scientific. Using rhetorical appeals both to readers’ emotions and to their need for ration- al evidence to support her arguments, she believes that both spiritual and scientific pursuit can lead individuals to truth, inspiration, and access to their own destiny. Personal Authority Displaces Religious Authority Williams’s religious upbringing has taught her the art of self-scrutiny and spiritual introspection. The spiritual autobiography she writes, however, does not intend to examine the self in order to confess misdeeds. On the contrary, her text often aims to affirm misdeeds and even advocate transgression. In effect, Refuge condones both civil and religious disobe- dience when an individual deems it necessary: “Dogma doesn’t hold me. Wildness does” (240).5 During an interview subsequent to the publica- tion of her book, she enlarges upon her explanation of this personally held belief: Although an orthodox Mormon may think free agency is about honoring obedience and finding freedom within that obedience, spiritual laws and principles, I’ve never honored that belief. For me, the most important value is independent thought, the freedom to choose a creative path. That’s how I have been able to survive within the Mormon tradition. (Pearlman 126) As a Mormon woman, Williams can’t escape mentioning polygamy. Yet the doctrine of polygamy is not an issue that she explores at any length in her text. Her first reference to polygamy occurs when she Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 156 156 Faithful Transgressions in the American West explains LDS Apostle Snow’s 1885 conviction for unlawful cohabita- tion when he served eleven months in the Utah State Penitentiary (103). The other passing reference occurs when she discusses the possi- bility of a distant connection between her and a stranger who gives her a ride back to Salt Lake City from Boulder, Utah. “If I had asked enough questions, I am certain I would have discovered Robert and I were relat- ed through polygamy several generations back. The dark side of resi- dency” (172). What is an issue for her is the current subordinate posi- tion and authority of women within the church. She views contempo- rary Mormon women’s training toward submission and obedience to be detrimental to them and their community. “[A]s a Mormon woman of the fifth generation of Latter-day Saints,” she writes, “I must question everything, even if it means losing my faith, even if it means becoming a member of a border tribe among my own people. Tolerating blind obe- dience in the name of patriotism or religion ultimately takes our lives” (286). She characterizes her own dying Mormon mother as moving away from strict orthodoxy as she is forced to accept death from breast can- cer. “[Mother] is . . . flying with newfound knowledge of what it means to live,” she writes. “She is reading Zen, Krishnamurti, and Jung, asking herself questions she has never had the courage to explore. Suddenly, the shackles which have bound her are beginning to snap, as personal revelation replaces orthodoxy” (136). She also describes her grand- mother Mimi as having “read herself straight out of Mormonism and into Eastern religious thought—but refused to replace one dogma with another” (246). She then dramatizes her grandmother speaking of giv- ing “birth” to a cancerous tumor in a toilet. Mimi compares the process to her religious conditioning being discarded, inspiring Terry to follow her liberal grandmother’s lead. She purposefully reconstructs her grand- mother’s words: “I let go of my conditioning. . . . I could only say this to you. ‘Finally, I am rid of the orthodoxy.’ My advice to you, dear, is do it consciously” (246). Thus, a subplot to her text is the story of how and why she has abandoned strict adherence to orthodox Mormon doctrine, pushing beyond the boundaries of male church authority and affirming the legitimacy of an individual’s subversive act by following female eld- ers and forging a belief of her own. Williams transgresses the boundaries of Mormon doctrine by narrat- ing many scenes in which she, her mother, grandmother Mimi, and her husband participate in activities that orthodox Mormons would likely Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 157 A Home Windswept with Paradox 157 shun. For example, she and her mother have their astrology charts read. “It seemed like a reasonable thing to do,” she writes. “As Mimi said, ‘If it sheds light on all the confusion, why not?’” (115). The mother and daughter even gamble in Wendover, Nevada. She narrates the scene of their gambling with apparent relish. As the two pull on the slot machines and throw in their winning nickels, she writes that someone yelled, “These women are hot!” (128). She also drinks champagne with her husband to toast their marriage (153), breaking the taboo of the Mormon Word of Wisdom without regret. Finally, she writes about blessing the root-ball of a tree that she then plants at her new home up Emigration Canyon. In the scene, she writes that her father is unim- pressed, telling his son-in-law, “I’m sorry, Brooke. All this hocus-pocus did not come from me” (194). Even more than writing about these unorthodox activities, however, Williams dares to reinterpret Mormon doctrine on the nature of the Godhead. In Refuge, she explains that she believes the Holy Ghost, a spirit Being who has always been gendered male in Mormon theology, could actually be female. “Today I choose to recognize this presence as holy intuition,” she writes, “the gift of the Mother in Heaven” (241). Mormons have always accepted the idea of a Mother in Heaven since Joseph Smith proposed the doctrine and Eliza R. Snow immortalized his words in a hymn dear to Latter-day Saints’ hearts.6 Like many Mormon feminists, Williams prays to both her Father and Mother in Heaven, a practice specifically condemned by contemporary church leaders. “My prayers no longer bear the ‘proper’ masculine salutation,” she admits. “If we could introduce the motherbody as a spiritual counterpoint to the Godhead, perhaps our inspiration and devotion would no longer be directed to the stars, but our worship could return to the Earth. My physical mother is gone. My spiritual mother remains. I am a woman rewriting my genealogy” (241). In this autobiographical act, she is also a woman rewriting her own theology. The transgressive nature of writing openly about her unorthodox beliefs illustrates the ways that Williams explicitly and repeatedly coun- ters and displaces male religious authority to privilege her own personal authority and interpretation of gospel doctrine. Unlike many Mormon women autobiographers before her, who also questioned the authority of their religious leaders in writing, Williams writes more on the offense (in both senses of the word) rather than on the defense. She specifically resists what she views as rigid adherence to strict orthodoxy and a per- Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 158 158 Faithful Transgressions in the American West vasive religious message that dissuades church members from question- ing their leaders. Her writing aims to inspire a rejection of unquestion- ing obedience to institutions or outside authority, choosing instead to valorize personal authority and freedom of choice. “I have been raised in a culture that believes in personal revelation,” explains Williams, “that it is not something buried and lost with ancient prophets of the Old Testament. In the early days of the Mormon Church, authority was found within the individual, not outside” (196). Such a passage illustrates the influence of an American writer such as Henry David Thoreau on Williams’s own writing. As an autobiograph- er himself, a student of the outdoors, and a staunch advocate of the indi- vidual over the institution, Thoreau declares, “There will never be a really free and enlightened State until the State comes to recognize the individual as a higher and independent power, from which all its own power and authority are derived, and treats him accordingly” (“Civil Disobedience” 1496). He also asserts, “That government is best which governs least” (1481). Williams advocates similar nonintervention with regard to the environment and the Utah government’s decision to pre- vent the Great Salt Lake from flooding. Of the government’s various plans, she writes, “Evidently, to do nothing is not an option” (61). She further recreates dialogue between herself and a worker on the pumping project in order to express her own disfavor toward trying to control the Great Salt Lake. “Between you and me,” he says, “they ought to just let the lake do its thing. It will anyway. It always does. They can come back and rebuild the road on another day when it decides to recede” (63). Different from Hafen and Tanner, who authorize their argument based on their personal experience in Mormon polygamy rather than on their public achievements, Williams is able to make claims to both per- sonal experience and professional expertise. About an autobiographer’s need to gain credibility, Shea explains, “Autobiographical argument succeeds or fails initially with the autobiographer’s attempt to demon- strate his [or her] authority. In autobiography as in fiction the plausibil- ity and consistency of the narrator must be validated” (17). In Mormon women’s autobiography of the early twentieth century, women typically authorize themselves through their Mormon lineage or through a pow- erful conversion story. Women writers also work to demonstrate that they know Mormon doctrine, that they can quote male religious author- ities, that they have had spiritual experiences, and that they are in good standing with the church. In their autobiographies, however, they may Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 159 A Home Windswept with Paradox 159 recount their accomplishments, but they also often understate them. Furthermore, their achievements are often tied to having children and to nurturing those children’s achievements. While Tanner works to prove her intellectual capacities in her autobiography, she still never earned a formal degree of higher education, so she can provide evidence for her intellect only through the quality and content of her writing. Hafen is minimally educated, but she works to achieve credibility by association, alluding to her educated son’s participation in writing and editing the text. By virtue of her race and the numerous invitations to speak on blacks and the Mormon Church, Martin, too, works to author- ize her writing. Furthermore, her membership in the Mormon Tabernacle Choir lends her unique credibility and interest as a Mormon woman autobiographer. In Williams’s case, however, she authorizes her autobiographical act, not only through her Mormon upbringing and knowledge of the doctrine, but also through her college degrees, profes- sional credentials as a scientist, numerous appeals to the work of author- ities in science (more than religion), and her sophisticated literary style. Williams alludes to and quotes from many other historical or con- temporary scientists, including, for example, Captain Howard Stansbury’s Exploration and Survey of the Great Salt Lake, 1852 (7); a “classic study” on the birds of Great Salt Lake by Dr. William H. Behle, curator of ornithology at the Utah Museum of Natural History (72); and author Fred Ryser’s Birds of the Great Basin (259). She purposely builds up her credentials as a scholar who has read widely in her field and speaks with authority about her own experiences tracking birds at Great Salt Lake. The scientific aspect of her story valorizes her relationship with the natural world. Unlike Hafen and Tanner, Williams is a Mormon woman more interested in nurturing the land and writing about wildlife than in nurturing and writing about children. Although Williams resists motherhood for herself, she, like Hafen, Tanner, and Brooks, valorizes family and community ties, characterizing herself as a family and community historian, examining particular aspects of her Mormon community’s history and doctrine while narrat- ing key portions of her own and her family’s life story in order to advance her ecofeminist argument. For Williams, however, rather than promoting Mormon doctrine or enumerating the lessons she hopes to pass on to her posterity, the main thrust of her message centers on cele- brating and preserving the environment. Therefore, instead of an overt religious message, her purpose is to persuade readers to exercise respect Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 160 160 Faithful Transgressions in the American West for “Mother” Earth and to reject attitudes or behaviors that could dam- age the land’s “natural” rhythms and ecosystems. Like Martin, she feels passionate about the message she intends to share with her audience, and she makes the personal unabashedly political; she is a committed activist. About her professional work as naturalist-in-residence at the Utah Museum of Natural History, she declares, “Nothing inspires me more than a little controversy. We are in the business of waking people up to their surroundings. A museum is a good place to be quietly sub- versive on behalf of the land” (44). Thus, Williams expands the tradition of Mormon women’s autobiog- raphy by including scientific information to arrive at truth, alongside the more personal story of her family’s struggle with cancer. Each chap- ter begins, for instance, with a precise number indicating the lake’s level, reminding readers that she is a scientist, showing them numbers as factual proof for her argument, and lending a sense of rationality to her imaginative storytelling. Writing as scientist and a Mormon geneal- ogist, Williams binds the life of her family to the life of the lake through numbers. In one section, for example, she weaves a scene recreating the evening of her father’s birthday celebration, together with a paragraph on the record heights of the Great Salt Lake. “We celebrated Dad’s birthday, July 26, 1933,” she writes. “He reminded Mother, as he does each year, that he is one year younger than she” (78). By the next page, after mentioning her father’s present age, fifty-one, Williams documents the recent record levels of the lake: Great Salt Lake shimmered in the background. It rose another 5' from September 25, 1983, to July 1, 1984, the second-largest rise ever recorded for the lake. The net rise from September 18, 1982 to July 1, 1984 was 9.6'. In comparison, the previously recorded maximum net rise of Great Salt Lake between any two years was 4.7', during 1970 and 1972. (79) She resolves this brief section of Refuge by moving from the lake “shimmering” in the background back to her family’s celebration: “‘Make a wish . . .’ said Mother. And we watched him blow out the can- dles” (79). Refuge is replete with other verifiable data and numbers that docu- ment such things as precise costs for proposed solutions to the flooding (58–61), the checklist dates for unusual bird sightings of flamingos, called “accidentals” in Utah (88), and the exact dates and places of atomic testing (283). She further works to bolster her credibility as a Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 161 A Home Windswept with Paradox 161 scientist by referencing the work of other scientists past and present. Each of her references to other scientists’ work is intended to educate readers and authorize Williams’s own claims. Her allusions to other sci- entists’ work are similar to the kind of reverence an orthodox Mormon woman might use to refer to the pronouncements of LDS general authorities. She writes, for example, about the “classic study” of ornithologist William H. Behle, who, according to Williams, “wrote prophetically” about what would happen if the “delicate” balance that must occur “between colony-nesting birds, the fluctuating Great Salt Lake, and its wetlands” is not maintained. She then quotes a paragraph from Behl’s “prophecy”: “If present trends continue, there is danger that the islands of Great Salt Lake will be entirely abandoned by colonial birds. . . .” (72). She follows up this excerpt from Behl with Captain Howard Stansbury’s detailed observations of the habitat of the Great Salt Lake, written on April 9 and May 8, 1850. Williams also makes room in her text for the pronouncements of contemporary scientist, Tim Provan, who works as the waterfowl biologist for the Division of Wildlife Resources in Salt Lake City. His, too, is a voice of warning. “There is a certain threshold that once crossed,” says Provan, “we can never recover. When the death rates [of birds] exceed the birth rates, we are in trouble. Nobody knows the answers. We are working with the questions” (114). A Poetic Prose Style Ultimately, while all the scientific data and information that Williams offers readers in her book add evidence, credibility, and authority to her argument, such facts and figures would probably not, on their own, draw readers’ interest as compellingly as the imaginative story she narrates alongside the science. Her book is a success because it is a family and wildlife saga that both educates and entertains. Like her predecessors, she crafts life stories with literary intentions. To one degree or another, all of the autobiographers in this study use metaphor, irony, orchestrat- ed scenes, recreated dialogue, narrative tension, climax, and dramatic resolution to tell their life stories and advance their arguments. However, as a professional scientist and writer, Williams employs liter- ary devices in deliberately poetic ways, writing for a wide audience both within and beyond her Mormon community.7While previous Mormon women writers concentrated on testimony, she concentrates on testifying Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 162 162 Faithful Transgressions in the American West with a distinctly poetic literary style. “Like [Rachel] Carson, whom she has named as her foremost role model, she merges the imagination of a creative writer with a belief in the eloquence of facts and writes prose suffused with the lyric grace of poetry” (Anderson 974). Writing from both a spiritual and a secular writing tradition, her envi- ronmental-activist themes are influenced by a series of nature writers from nineteenth- and twentieth-century America, including such authors as Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry David Thoreau, Aldo Leopold, Edward Abbey, Willa Cather, Rachel Carson, and Annie Dillard. The writing style that Williams uses combines what readers often perceive to be nonfiction with fiction and poetry with prose. In many passages, for example, she uses a relatively straightforward, nonfiction prose to edu- cate her audience about the animals of a desert community (9), Lake Bonneville and the Pleistocene Epoch (30), or archeological digs that show the Fremont people harvested grasshoppers from the shore of Great Salt Lake (181–83). In other passages, however, she uses strings of one- word or short sentences to list animal, plant, or bird life, recalling the poetic style of mid-nineteenth-century American bard Walt Whitman as he works to catalogue multiple living things in Leaves of Grass (1855). When describing a trip to the marshes of Teal Spring, for instance, she writes, “Brooke will come later this evening. Until then, I shall curl up in the grasses like a bedded animal and dream. Marsh music. Red-wing blackbirds. Yellow-headed blackbirds. Song sparrows. Barn swallows snapping mosquitoes on the wing. Herons traversing the sky”(150). Similar to Whitman’s “Song of Myself,” where he celebrates the indi- vidual, the body, and sexuality, Williams, too, works to immerse readers in tactile sensation. She often uses alliteration and poetic language that focuses on rhythmic sight, sound, touch, and smell, experimenting with what she explains is her attempt to discover the “mother tongue.” Wind and waves. Wind and waves. The smell of brine is burning in my lungs. I can taste it on my lips. I want more brine, more salt. Wet hands. I lick my fingers, until I am sucking them dry. I close my eyes. The smell and taste combined reminds me of making love in the Basin; flesh slippery with sweat in the heat of the desert. Wind and waves. A sigh and a surge. (240) During an interview published in 1993, she discusses the influence of Helene Cixous, French feminist theorist, and Claudine Herrmann, author of The Tongue Snatchers, on her own writing style, describing her renegade intent when constructing such passages as the one about “wind and waves” given above. Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 163 A Home Windswept with Paradox 163 I am interested, as a writer, in finding what the mother tongue is. I believe it has to do with structure, form and style. I think it has to do with identify- ing relationships that break through the veneer of what is proper, what is expected. The language that women speak when nobody is there to correct them oftentimes can make people uncomfortable because it threatens to undermine the status quo. (Pearlman 123) Williams also subversively associates a personified nature with the body and sexual imagery. “Brooke and I slip our red canoe into Half- Moon Bay,” she writes. “Great Salt Lake accepts us like a lover. We dip our wooden paddles into the icy waters and make strong, rapid strokes, north. The canoe powers gracefully ahead” (275). One of the most distinctive literary features of Refuge is the way that she interlocks the story of her mother’s death with the story of the flood- ing of the Bear River Migratory Bird Refuge. To do so, she uses reen- forcing or contrasting parallels through word echoes located near each other in the text but within separate passages. To illustrate, early in her story she describes the geologic features of the Great Salt Lake and then the two hundred eight species of birds that inhabit the wetlands of Great Salt Lake and the Bird Refuge. “It is here in the marshes with the birds that I seal my relationship to Great Salt Lake. I could never have anticipated its rise” (22). Immediately following this passage, she breaks from her scientific discussion of the Bear River Migratory Bird Refuge and begins a new passage about her mother’s tumor with a sentence that echoes the word “rise” from the previous passage: “My mother was aware of a rise on the left side of her abdomen” (22). Williams continues to tie her family and human life with nature using this pattern of word echo- ing throughout her text. At one point, weighed down with guilt and grief, she describes her emotional reaction to a doctor’s office scene with her mother. She writes, “I fled for Bear River, for the birds, wishing someone would rescue me” (68). By the next paragraph, however, she retreats from showing raw emotion in her text to the detachment of a more objective-sounding passage about nature, repeating the word “res- cue” but in a different context: “The California gulls rescued the Mormons in 1848 from losing their crops to crickets. The gull has become folklore. It is a story we know well” (69). Mormon folklore about the seagulls eating the crickets is a story told to give believers faith and hope in God’s ability and willingness to work miracles. Williams’s decision to link a scene of despair with a scene of hope using the word “rescue” is no accident. She interconnects numerous other passages between nature and her family experience similarly. Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 164 164 Faithful Transgressions in the American West Another way that Williams interlocks her human story with the story of the Utah landscape is through her own and her family members’ extensive use of personification or metaphors consistently based on the natural world. After receiving the news from her doctor that Diane Tempest had cancer for the second time in her life, she writes, “Mother and I got into the car. It started to rain. In a peculiar sort of way, the weather gave us permission to cry” (28). Later, Williams reports that Diane tells her family, “We’ve got some white water ahead” (29). And then after an emergency hysterectomy, she claims that her father describes his wife coming out of surgery as looking “like a skinned deer” (37). Williams herself personifies the family grief as though it has an actual location with recognizable features. She writes, “Each tragedy has its own territory” (35). Not all the personification or metaphor of Refuge is bleak, however. Sometimes Williams is playful with language; still, almost all her compar- isons are grounded in nature. Describing family visitors, for example, she writes, “Dad mowed the lawn between clumps of relatives” (34). Later in her story, she uses nature metaphors to imaginatively illustrate and reclaim her painful family experience with the beauty and power of ani- mal life. Describing how she must change her mother’s morphine drip, for example, Williams writes, “I puncture the bottom of the bag with the IV apparatus and hang it on the mechanical tree like a hummingbird feeder” (220). Then, she says, “I count her breaths. They have the intensity and fullness of a surfacing whale’s” (223). As she and her family wait for their mother’s inevitable death, Williams gives witness to her father’s helpless feeling of rage, drawing attention to how the family name “Tempest” reflects their present troubled situation, similar to nature’s shifting, turbu- lent weather. “Lights in the room are flickering as the storm wages its own battle outside. Tempest. Our father is honoring his name” (227). Williams supplies many other metaphors such as these throughout her text to reen- force her family’s relationship with the outdoors. Through both her style and themes, she works to show readers that human beings are integral with and, thus, responsible to their environment. The most significant comparison that Williams extends throughout Refuge is the one she draws between herself, her family, and the birds of Utah. Although too numerous to explore at length here, Williams’s comparisons of her family with bird life are meant to highlight what she views as undeniable similarities between human interactions and what occurs among a community of birds interacting with their environment. Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 165 A Home Windswept with Paradox 165 First influenced by her grandmother Mimi, an avid bird watcher and, according to Williams, a contributing member of numerous conserva- tionist organizations in the United States (246), she clearly believes human beings have much to learn from birds. Sometimes she commu- nicates these metaphors between family and birds through her choice of verbs. She describes, for instance, her extended family as “flocking” to her aunt and uncle’s home for an “archetypal American Thanksgiving” in Milburn, Utah (123). Other times, she narrates fuller comparisons. In a discussion about possible children, she writes that her mother, Diane, wishes she would tell Terry’s children that their grandmother was “the bird’s nest behind the waterfall” (61). When Diane is dying, Terry notices her mother’s hairbrush. “Pulling out the nest of short, black hairs,” she writes. “I suddenly remember the birds” (233). After Diane’s death, she describes the men in her family as having “migrated south for one year to lay pipe in southern Utah. My keening is for my family, frac- tured and displaced” (238). Ultimately, birds become the most spiritual and symbolic imagery of Williams’s text. To her, birds “bridge cultures and continents with their wings”; they are the great mediators “between heaven and earth” (18). “I pray to the birds,” she writes, “because I believe they will carry the messages of my heart upward” (149). She views the birds with the same reverence that she views her mother. “She is the bird touching both heaven and earth,” says Williams, “flying with newfound knowledge of what it means to live” (136). In grief over thoughts of losing her moth- er, she writes also about feeling a kinship with the birds that have lost their home to the flooded refuge. “The birds of Bear River have been displaced,” says Williams; “so have I” (97). No passage more poignantly reconstructs the pain of a daughter losing her mother. In life narratives about death, such poignancy, according to Miller, is to be expected. “A mother’s death may foreclose further twists of the plot that links gener- ations of women. But the mother’s voice continues to reverberate in the daughter’s house of memory” (Bequest 57). Each chapter of Refuge is titled with the name of a bird and focuses on that bird’s contribution to the diversity, adaptability, or survivability of wildlife, illustrating what Williams believes that human beings can learn from winged creatures. Early in her story, she claims, “There are those birds you gauge your life by” (9). She then writes about the bur- rowing owls, who “alert me to the regularities of the land” (8), charac- terizing them using both sacred and menacing language. “These small Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 166 166 Faithful Transgressions in the American West owls pursue their prey religiously at dusk,” she explains. She also asserts that the real possibility of the owls achieving endangered species status means they become “more blessed” each year (9). But when Williams describes their dwellings, she characterizes their homes with a threaten- ing metaphor, seeming to wish a warning in words to those who might hurt the owls. “What is distinctive about these owls is their home,” she claims. “It rises from the alkaline flats like a clay-covered fist” (9). Williams intends to characterize their home as a fist early on because she is setting up for a moment later in the chapter when she will express her fury at male members of the Canadian Goose Gun Club, who laugh at bird lovers such as Williams and who put up a “cinderblock building” with a “Keep Out” sign in the location where the owls’ fist-like home used to be. “I knew rage,” she writes. “It was fire in my stomach with no place to go” (12). Finally, it appears that by writing down the incident here in her story, she is able to exorcise her outrage and grief over the infuriating and troubling incident. Williams’s writing aims to raise consciousness about what animal life and birds in particular can teach human beings about living and adapt- ing to change or death. In fact, she argues that human communities share many things in common with bird communities, implying that humans are more like birds than they may think and that humans can learn from birds’ behaviors. For example, some birds appear noble, even close to divinity, like the ibises, which, according to Williams, have been called “the companions of gods” and may be one of two colors. She explains, “The dark bird is believed to be associated with death, the white bird a celebration of birth” (18). In addition, she reconstructs Mimi describing an ibis’s unique appearance during sleep. “‘When an ibis tucks it head underwing to sleep, it resembles a heart. The ibis knows empathy,’ my grandmother said. ‘Remember that, alongside the fact it eats worms’” (18). Here Williams personifies a bird with the capacity to empathize but, thanks to Mimi’s realism, keeps the fanciful claim grounded in reality. Williams repeatedly anthropomorphizes birds. In contrast to the ibis’s association with the divine and empathy, for example, she illustrates that bird communities also consist of more “mortal” or “selfish” members, like the starlings who swarm around the municipal dump near the Great Salt Lake. “The starlings gorge themselves,” she writes, “bumping into each other like drunks. They are not discretionary. They’ll eat anything, just like us” (55). Williams admits, “When I’m out at the dump with Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 167 A Home Windswept with Paradox 167 starlings, I don’t want to like them. They are common. They are aggres- sive, and they behave poorly, crowding out other birds. . . . They want their trash to themselves” (56). Similar to starlings, California gulls become symbols of territoriality, but also of resiliency, heroics (69), and survival as they scavenge for food (71); pink flamingos become symbols of hope that appear in unexpected places like the Great Salt Lake (90); snow buntings, also rare to Salt Lake, become symbols of the possibility for miracles (94); and a killdeer, feigning a broken wing, becomes sym- bolic of self- and family preservation. Watching the killdeer with her grandmother, Williams observes, “She’s trying to distract us. It’s a pro- tective device.” To which Mimi responds, “We’re not so different” (119). At the end of Refuge,Williams explicitly admits to her desire to live as a member of some flock or to wade alone in the water as the great blue heron does, “solitary and serene. . . . This is a bird who knows how to protect herself” (266). She writes about her yearning to survive like the birds who return and flourish at the bird refuge, even after it is flooded: “[T]his is another paradox of mine—wanting to be a bird when I am human” (266). Cataloguing the bird species of Utah and their attrib- utes, Williams’s book illustrates how she works just as hard as any Mormon genealogist might work to chart her family lineage. In fact, early on she maintains, “I knew these birds from our private trips to the Refuge. They had become relatives” (19). Later, she will write, “At the end of each day, I write down the names of all birds seen and read them out loud, regardless of who is there. It’s like throwing a party and after- wards talking about who came” (88). The genealogical connection she works to create between her family, friends, and the birds of Utah also demonstrates her rhetorical aim as an ecofeminist to affirm relationships, especially among women. She gives textual space and literal voice, for instance, to her mother (82), grand- mother Mimi (130), and Tamra Crocker Pulfer (94), a family friend who also dies from cancer, by including their actual letters to each other in the text. Such correspondences, she writes, “show us where our intima- cies lie” (84). Mary G. Mason and Susan Stanford Friedman, theorists in women’s autobiography, have long argued for the relational nature of women’s autobiography. Mason discusses the “real presence and recog- nition of another consciousness” in women’s autobiographies. She argues that the “disclosure of female self is linked to identification of some ‘other.’ This grounding of identity through relation to the chosen Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 168 168 Faithful Transgressions in the American West other, seems to enable some women to write openly about themselves,” says Mason (22). Likewise, Friedman notes the importance of group identity for women and minorities. She argues that in the autobiogra- phies of many men, “individualistic paradigms of the self ignore the role of collective and relational identities in the individuation process of women and minorities” (72). What makes Williams’s writing about rela- tionships unique is how she compares their relations and their letters, once again, to her beloved birds. She writes, “Our correspondences have wings—paper birds that fly from my house to yours—flocks of ideas crisscrossing the country. Once opened, a connection is made. We are not alone in the world” (84). In contrast to the understated way that Hafen narrates the difficulty of raising her polygamous family alone or the detached manner in which she describes her own mother’s death, Williams works to evoke readers’ sympathy for her loss by elongating and dramatizing key scenes of grief from both her own and her family’s experience. Also different from Hafen or Tanner, who meticulously chronicle the birth dates, names, and accomplishments of their children, Williams has no children. In essence, her personal story is not about giving birth and raising posteri- ty but about coming to terms with death. Thus, in ironic contrast to the tradition of Mormon women’s autobiography with its genealogical focus on birth dates, Williams meticulously records, instead, the death cir- cumstances and dates of female family members, including her mother and two grandmothers: “November 15, 1988, Lettie Romney Dixon passed away at noon from lingering illness” (261); “Mimi passed away this morning at 5:10 a.m., June 27, 1989” (271). Williams dramatizes the hours and minutes leading up to her mother’s passing as she sits breathing with Diane, assisting her mother into her final moment of death, which she records with precision: “7:56 p.m. I stood by Brooke. I felt as though I had been midwife to my mother’s birth” (231). This scene, depicted using her obvious narrative skill, illustrates Williams’s great love for her mother. She characterizes her love for Mother Earth with equal fervor. Williams also writes repeatedly, however, about resist- ing literal motherhood for herself, telling her own mother that her ideas are her children (221). Without explicitly saying so, Williams’s fears over her family’s history of breast cancer may mean that she is con- cerned about her own health, not wanting, perhaps, to give birth to children who would be forced to face the grief that she, herself, is expe- riencing by losing her mother to cancer. “The hollow eggs translated Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 169 A Home Windswept with Paradox 169 into hollow wombs,” she writes. “The Earth is not well and neither are we. I saw the health of the planet as our own” (262–63). Williams writes during the early 1980s, producing a work that figures the Earth as female, an argument now often criticized, even among fem- inist theorists, who generally view the “Mother Earth” metaphor as problematic because of its tendency to essentialize the female or assign traditionally held female gender characteristics to the land, based on some assumed inherent qualities, rather than recognize gender as cul- turally determined by a process of training and performance. In Refuge, Williams genders the land as female and any man-made objects as phal- lic, male, unnatural, and destructive. The “Tree of Utah,” an art piece by European architect Karl Momen (who, she says, “saw the West Desert as ‘a large white canvas with nothing on it’”) is one example Williams uses to illustrate man’s intrusion on the environment. “With the light of morning,” she writes, “it cast a shadow across the salt flats like a mushroom cloud” (127). Extending this negative imagery to describe the lifeless, “man made tree” as ultimately being overshadowed by the environment, Williams writes that it “rose from the salt flats like a small phallus dwarfed by the open space that surrounded it” (127). Passages such as this one grow out of what Bella Brodzki and Celeste Schenck, editors of LifeLines: Theorizing Women’s Autobiography, describe as 1970s Western feminism, which argued in terms of duality or of confrontation and exclusivities: male vs. female, heterosexual vs. homosexual, independence vs. constraints of family, passive acquies- cence to society’s dictates vs. revolt and militant activism (x). In the late 1990s, Brodzki and Schenck point out that feminist scholarship complicates these dualities, resisting thinking in such absolutes or pure “gender” terms as her/story, his/story. Refuge, however, still participates in the pastoral tradition of American literature that perpetuates the idea of the Earth as gendered female. In other words, Williams’s writing tends to reproduce cultural stereotypes of inherent difference between men and women, reflecting the mood of second wave feminism in which women were “collectively undifferentiated” in their subordination to men (Smith and Watson 10). Karla Armbruster defends the connection that Williams makes between women and nature in Refuge because both have been similarly subjugated and devalued, so that at times, her “tem- porary” and “conscious” decision to make these connections is appro- priately strategic (213), but not because she believes they share “an inherent essence” (217). Kircher also addresses the problematic and Faithful Transgressions.qxd 2/3/04 1:14 PM Page 170 170 Faithful Transgressions in the American West “implicit dichotomies” of Williams’s text, as well as the contradictory consumerism and consumption that she is honest about but “fails to examine” (168). Ultimately, however, Kircher grants that “Williams’s dichotomies do not adequately capture the intrinsic complexity of Refuge” (161), which makes the book valuable as a “site for critical debate” (170). Despite Refuge’s strong environmentalist, feminist, and pluralist agen- das, Williams’s text ultimately grows out of Mormon women’s tradition of narrating spiritual autobiography. Writing the book satisfies her deep need to accommodate personal pain, to find refuge within the change often brought about by loss, and to protest against “unnatural” (i.e., “man-made”) death or destruction. Her work is one among only a few pioneering contributions to late-twentieth-century Mormon women’s autobiographical writing in both its rhetoric and literary style. By repeating, revising, and expanding the tradition of Mormon women’s autobiography, Williams dares to forge important fresh territory for Mormon women’s personal narratives. Her book offers a rising genera- tion of Mormon women autobiographers an empowering new writing model to follow. As Jan Whitt observes, “She champions the rights of individuals to find and define God in their own ways; at the same time, she celebrates the history, the religious tradition, and the physical and spiritual pilgrimages of the Mormon people” (83).