news and comment The papers presented in the Proceedings of the Wisconsin Historical Society at its sixty-fourth annual meeting, October 19, 1916 (1917. 363 p.), include, among others: "President Lincoln as War Statesman," by Captain Arthur L. Conger; "Reminiscences of a Pioneer Missionary," by Father Chrysostom A. Verwyst; and "The Beginnings of the Norwegian Press in America," by Albert O. Barton. The volume contains also the usual report of the executive committee recounting the activities of the society during the year and discussing plans for the future. "The Origin of the Various Names of the Mississippi River" is the title of a brief article by T. P. Thompson in volume 9 of the Publications of the Louisiana Historical Society (1917. 134 p.). The volume consists of proceedings and reports for 1916. The presidential address at the last meeting of the Mississippi Valley Historical Association, "The Rise of Sport," by Frederic L. Paxson, is printed in the Mississippi Valley Historical Review for September. This issue contains also the annual review of "Historical Activities in Canada," by Lawrence J. Burpee. The Wisconsin Historical Society has recently received from the daughter of one of its founders a bequest of property valued at about twenty-five thousand dollars. The income is to be "devoted to the editing of materials for middle-western history, preferably that of Wisconsin itself." The 1917 issue of Acta et Dicta, the serial published by the Catholic Historical Society of St. Paul, contains valuable con tributions to the history of Minnesota and the Northwest. Arch bishop Ireland's life of Bishop Cretin is continued from the 1916 number, carrying the narrative to the year 1838, when the subject left France for America. "A Chapter of Catholic Colonization," by William J. Onahan, deals with the work of the Irish Catholic Colonization Association of the United States, including the establishment of colonies in and around Adrian 282 1917 NEWS AND COMMENT 283 in Nobles County and Currie in Murray County, Minnesota. An article on the "Titular Bishops of the Province of St. Paul" is contributed by Rev. J. A. Bigaouette ; and Rev. James M. Rear don sketches the career of the late "Father Lacombe, the Black Robe Voyageur," who served as a missionary to the Indians at Pembina and in the Canadian Northwest from 1849 on. The section devoted to documents contains an interesting and impor tant description of the customs of the Indians, particularly the O jib way s of the Lake Superior region, in the shape of a lecture delivered by Bishop Baraga at Cincinnati in 1863. This is con tributed by Rev. J. L. Zaplotnik, who also furnishes biographical data about the bishop. The "Letters of Bishop Loras, 1832 and 1836," included in this section, are preceded by an account of the materials relating to him in the society's collection. Considerable biographical information is presented under the headings "Con temporary Items" and "Obituary Notices," and other sections discuss the work of the society and announce some of its recent acquisitions. Especially noteworthy among the latter is the library of Auguste L. Larpenteur "containing many books and papers of unusual historical value." The increasing realization of the importance of state history and of the desirability of fostering a more general interest in it is evidenced by the birth in 1917 of five quarterlies published by the historical societies of New York, Louisiana, Georgia, Michigan, and Wisconsin. The latest to appear is the Wisconsin Magazine of History, the first number of which is dated Septem ber, 1917. The articles in this issue are: "Increase Allen Lap ham, First Scholar of Wisconsin," by Milo M. Quaife; "A Forest Fire in Northern Wisconsin," by John L. Bracklin; and "Banker's Aid in 1861-62," by Louise P. Kellogg. These are followed by sections devoted to "Documents," "Historical Frag ments," "Editorials," "Question Box," and "Survey of His torical Activities." The October number of the Michigan History Magazine con tains an article on "Government Survey and Charting of the Great Lakes from the Beginning of the Work in 1841 to the Present," by John Fitzgibbon. 284 NEWS AND COMMENT Nov. The September issue of the History Teacher's Magazine con tains a very useful "List of Historical Novels, Illustrating Some Phases of Economic or Social Development in American His tory," compiled by Professor E. L. Bogart of the University of Illinois. The History of Lewis Township, Clay County, Indiana, will be welcomed as a suggestion for historical work in the schools. It was written by the teachers and pupils of the Lewis Township schools during the year 1915-16 and published in 1916 (Brazil, Indiana. 109 p.). The Coalmont High School students and faculty prepared several chapters on the geology of the township, its history and pioneer life, while the elementary schools supplied sketches of their districts and biographies of pioneers. The pamphlet is illustrated with pictures of local landmarks and con tains a geological map. The journal kept by Thoreau during his travels in Minnesota in 1861 is of interest to nature lovers as well as to historians. Extensive extracts from this journal have been incorporated by Franklin B. Sanborn into his Life of Henry David Thoreau (New York, 1917. xx, 542 p.). In 1905 the Bibliophile Society of Boston published this journal as a part of The First and Last Journeys of Thoreau, but, as the edition was small and printed for the members only, it has not been accessible to the ordinary reader. Mr. Sanborn has reprinted nearly all of the entries of general interest, omitting chiefly Thoreau's scientific notes. The Minnesota State Federation of Labor Year Book for 1917 contains a sketch of the early phases of the "Minnesota Labor Movement." Such organizations as the Knights of Labor, the Eight Hour League, the St. Paul Trades and Labor Assembly, the State Federation of Labor, and various trades unions are dis cussed. In general the period covered is that from 1880 to 1900. The insurance department of Minnesota has published an attractive brochure containing a history of the department, bio graphical sketches of former commissioners, and descriptive mat ter about Minnesota and the Twin Cities. It is designated as the "Convention Number" of the department's Bulletin [number 1917 NEWS AND COMMENT 285 82], and contains the program of the National Convention of Insurance Commissioners, held at St. Paul, August 28-31. The history of the inception and development of the St. Paul Institute is recounted at some length in its Eighth Year-Book for 1915-16 (156 p.). In commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the founding of Wahkon, the business men of the city have recently published an illustrated booklet containing historical and descriptive mat ter (18 p.). "Water Power Development on the Mississippi above Saint Paul" is the title of an article by Ralph D. Thomas in the Sep tember Bulletin of the affiliated engineers' societies of Minne sota. The author, who is assistant engineer of the St. Anthony Falls Water Power Company, treats the subject from both his torical and engineering viewpoints. The geologic formation at the Falls of St. Anthony and the methods which have been used to conserve and direct the energy of the river for water-power purposes are described, and there is some discussion of the men and companies that have been most active in the field. Rev. John P. Williamson, whose death occurred at the Yank ton Agency, South Dakota, October 5, was born in 1835 at Lac Qui Parle, where his father, Dr. Thomas S. Williamson, had established a mission among the Sioux Indians. After the out break of 1862 he continued his father's work among the Indians, who had been removed to Nebraska and South Dakota. "Sioux Historic Trail" is the name adopted for the proposed highway to connect points of historical interest between Traverse des Sioux and Browns Valley. At a meeting of the promoters held in conjunction with the Fort Ridgely celebration of August 22 it was decided to mark the trail with three nine-inch stripes on the telephone poles, red in the center and white outside, the whole to be surmounted by a stenciled Indian head. A commit tee was appointed to locate the route definitely. The expectation is that it will lead up the Minnesota from St. Peter, through Traverse des Sioux, Fort Ridgely, Ramsey Park, and Granite Falls to Lac Qui Parle, then over the old Fort Gary trail to 286 NEWS AND COMMENT Nov. Browns Valley. In the Minneapolis Tribune of August 19 Eliz abeth McCleod Jones describes for tourists the places of histori cal interest along this route. Nearly eight thousand people gathered in the Fort Ridgely State Park on August 22 to celebrate the fifty-fifth anniversary of the battle of Fort Ridgely. Although national patriotism was the dominant note in the day's program, the speeches of Thomas Hughes and Lorin Cray of Mankato contained material of local historical interest. Mr. Hughes sketched the history of the fort, while Judge Cray, who took part in the suppression of the Sioux outbreak, gave his reminiscences. The two addresses with some account of the celebration are printed in the August 22 issue of the Mankato Free Press. An event of historic interest is the annual banquet given to the old settlers by the Junior Pioneers of New Ulm to celebrate the anniversary of the coming of the first settlers in 1854. Only two members of the original group are now living, Peter Mack of Milford and Mrs. Hembsch of St. Paul. Mr. Mack was an honored guest at the banquet for 1917, which was held October 7. On August 25 the boiler of the steamboat "Otter" was placed in Turner Park, New Ulm, as a memorial of early steam naviga tion on the Minnesota. This is all that remains of Captain Jacob Hinderman's boat, which plied western waterways from 1855 to 1879. The New Ulm Review of August 29 contains an account of the ceremonies and an historical sketch of the "Otter" by Captain Hinderman. Thursday evening, September 27, was home-coming night at the Rice County fair in Northfield, and a large portion of the program was devoted to speeches recalling incidents of frontier life. An exhibit of souvenirs of pioneer days interested many of the visitors. The following old settlers' associations have held annual meet ings during the past three months: Luverne Pioneer Girls at Luverne, July 26; Marshall County Old Settlers' Association at Lundin's grove, near Stephen, July 28; Cass County Pioneers' Association at Hackensack, July 28 ; Hennepin County Territorial 1917 NEWS AND COMMENT 287 Pioneers and Old Settlers' Association at Bederwood Temple, Wayzata, August 16; Itasca County Old Settlers' Association at Pokegama Lake, September 3; and St. Croix Valley Old Set tlers' Association at the Sawyer House, Stillwater, September 19. The Olmsted County pioneers organized an association8 on "Old Settlers' Day," which was observed September 11 at the Olmsted County fair. In connection with a plea for local support of Minnesota waterways Captain George H. Hazzard tells in the Winona Republican-Herald of September 1 of the development of trans portation in Minnesota during the eighties. Captain Hazzard came to Minnesota in 1856 and spent several years on the river boats as cabin boy and clerk; later he represented various rail road and transportation interests. He is, therefore, well able to furnish authoritative information on this subject. The article is reprinted in the September 8 issue of the Saturday Evening Post (Burlington, Iowa). Miss Pauline Colby is the author of some delightful "Retro spections" that have appeared in recent numbers of the Pine Knot, a magazine published by the patients of the state sanitorium at Walker. Some twenty-five years ago Miss Colby went to the Leech Lake mission to teach lace-making to the Chippewa women. The class was one of the first of several opened through the influ ence of Miss Sybil Carter, whose success in establishing this industry among the Indian women and girls is now well known. The "Retrospections" are written in the form of letters to an eastern friend acquainting her with the people and life of the reservation. The St. Paul Daily News for August 26 quotes at length from Marcus L. Hansen's "Old Fort Snelling" in an article entitled "Stories of 'Old Fort Snelling' Indian Fights Are Told by Iowa Historian." Another article in the same issue treats of Fort Snelling as the "Scene of U. S. Military Moves Since 1805." In the Minneapolis Ugebladet of August 16 appears a descrip tive article on Meeker County containing references to early Dan ish pioneers and present Danish-Americans who live in Litch field and its vicinity. The Danish immigrants have not been 288 NEWS AND COMMENT Nov. numerous, although some of them came to the country as early as the fifties. A list of the Watonwan County pioneers with the dates of their arrivals, compiled by O. T. Holslin, is printed in the Madelia Times Messenger of October 19. A brief "School His tory" of Madelia accompanies the list. Students of Scandinavian-American history will be inter ested in the account of the celebration of the seventieth anniver sary of the founding of the Nordlyset published in the Northfield American of August 3. The Nordlyset, a Free Soil paper, appeared in 1847 at Norway, Wisconsin, and was the first Nor wegian paper published in America. Its founder, Hans Christian Heg, was especially honored in the commemorative services held at Muskego, Wisconsin, July 29, under the auspices of the Ygdrasil Literary Society of Madison. In the Willmar Journal of October 20 the editor, C. F. Spencer, tells his recollections of the early struggles of the Valley Ven tilator, a paper established at Montevideo by C. W. Wheaton in 1876. Later it became the Montevideo Leader, which was recently consolidated with two other papers to form the Montevideo Nezvs. A history of the St?lwater Messenger with some account of the founder's family is printed in a sixty-first anniversary edition of that paper, which was published October 3. When the founder, Captain A. J. Van Vorhees, came to Minnesota in 1855, he selected Stillwater as a suitable town in which to establish a Republican paper. The first issue is dated September 11, 1856. The sixtieth anniversary of the establishing of the Red Wing Republican was the occasion of an historical sketch of that paper which appeared in the September 5 issue. The Roseau Times-Region of October 5 contains an interesting description of a Chippewa-Sioux battle which is said to have taken place in 1857 near Two Rivers, Roseau County. The account is based on the story told by a Chippewa survivor twenty years ago and is reprinted from a contemparory issue of the same paper. 1917 NEWS AND COMMENT 289 The issues of the Winona Republican-Herald for August 18 and 25 contain sketches by William Jay Whipple entitled "In the Primitive Days of 1852." The writer's own experiences furnish the material for his description of "log-raisings" and other activ ities of pioneer days. "Arm Chair Cogitations" is the title of an article on the history of the state fair grounds which appears in the H ay field Herald of September 13. The writer tells how the grounds came to be located in St. Paul. A list of "First Things in St. Paul" may be found in the Aug ust 26 issue of the St. Paul Daily News. Similar lists for Still water are printed in the Stillwater Gazette of October 17 and October 24. A series of sketches of Cottonwood County men is being pub lished by the Cottonwood County Citizen in "Our Biographical Department." Mr. Carl H. Ruhberg is the author. Some reminiscences by David T. Adams appear in the Duluth Herald of September 24 under the title "Pioneer of Mesaba Range Tells Story of Early Days." Mr. Adams discusses his part in the discovery of iron ore in the Mesaba hills and the sub sequent mine development in that range. An article entitled "Ramsey State Park Is Beauty Spot" in the Minneapolis Tribune of April 26 deals with some phases of the history of Redwood Falls and vicinity. The author is Eliza beth McCleod Jones. A letter from H. H. Davis, published in the Sherburne County Star News (Elk River) of August 30, tells of early log drives and points out something of their significance in the economic development of Minnesota. A reminiscent article in the Clay County Leader of October 19 tells of the Granger and Farmers' Alliance movements in Clay County. Some interesting incidents of pioneer life are related by Mrs. Helen Varney in the Anoka County Union of August 22. 290 NEWS AND COMMENT Nov. The Caledonia Journal of August 8 reprints Carl Becker's article on "The Monroe Doctrine and the War" from the May number of the Minnesota History Bulletin. The Saturday Evening Post of Burlington, Iowa, continues to publish valuable historical material on early river transportation. The section headed "The Old River Boats" contains letters from Samuel R. Van Sant, Fred A. Bill, and John Mahin of Chicago, August 18; a list of boats that went to Stillwater and St. Croix Falls, by Captain J. W. Darrah, September 15; and two articles by Fred A. Bill : "History of the Steamer Dubuque," October 6 ; and a biographical sketch of the late Rufus D. Button, clerk on the steamers of the Davidson line from 1866 to 1873, October 13. An autobiography of William Cairncross, entitled "Life on the Main Deck," is published in thirteen installments, beginning Aug ust 4. The author's career as a riverman dates back to 1847 and includes extensive experience in the navigation of the Mississippi and its tributaries. A number of church societies have recently held services to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of their organization, and in connection with accounts of these celebrations several papers have published historical notes regarding the churches. The Willmar Tribune of September 5 sketches the history of the Vin je Norwegian Lutheran Church, which celebrated its semicen tennial September 2. The Mankato Daily Review of September 17 prints pictures of several early pastors in connection with its account of the anniversary services of the Immanuel Lutheran Church of Mankato. On October 28 the Congregational society of Rochester marked the completion of the fiftieth year of its history by dedicating a new church building. Commemorative services were held by the members of the Anoka Universalist Church, September 12, and by the German Lutheran Church of St. Peter, September 23. An account of a twenty-fifth anniver sary service, together with a sketch of the congregation of the St. Paul's German Lutheran Church of South St. Paul, is pub lished in the St. Paul T?gliche Volkszeitung of September 3. Several contributions to the history of the Sioux War of 1862 are to be found in recent newspaper articles. The New Ulm 1917 NEWS AND COMMENT 291 Review of September 19 reprints an account of the first day's battle at New Ulm, published originally in a contemporary issue of the St. Peter Tribune. An editorial note accompanying the article explains that it was copied by Mrs. Gideon S. Ives from the scrapbook of her father, Governor Swift, who had endorsed on the margin, "Aug. 19, 1862. Battle of first day, before help came. True." The Review prints, also, two reminiscent accounts of these events: One, appearing August 22, is furnished by R. H. Henman of the Morton Indian Agency School, who bases his narrative on the story told him by one of the Indian partici pants, Hackita-Wakanda ; the other, in the issue of October 24, is an account, contributed by Luther C. Ives, of the organization and activities of the Leavenworth Company composed of men from Milford, Sigel, and Leavenworth townships. The part taken in the uprising by Company F, Ninth Minnesota, is told in the Rochester Daily Post and Record of August 22 under the title "Fort Ridgely Times Recalled." Cha?es. Culver, who partici pated in the war as a drummer boy in Company B, Fifth Minne sota, gives his recollections in the Mankato Review of August 28.