C H AsP T E R S I X T E E N The Blame Game Whose responsibility is habitat loss? In the mid-1800s, American philosopher Henry David Thoreau noted that his experience in the New England forest—because it was lacking so many native plants and animals—was like hearing a symphony performed with most of the instruments missing. Even in Thoreau’s time, only 200 years after the first pilgrims arrived on the east coast of North America, a drastic simplification and dismantling of the natural landscape of New England had already occurred. In the Intermountain West we are luckier than residents of many other locations, but we do listen to a similarly impoverished orchestra today. Native plants and animals are only expressions of natural landscapes; as these places disappear so do the creatures that inhabit them. The destruction did- n’t begin yesterday and it won’t end tomorrow. We can be certain it won’t end tomorrow because our civic debate—a long-running cat fight in the media spotlight—focuses on a power struggle between special interest groups rather than on individual responsibility for the problem of preserving habitat. Blaming others allows individuals to shrug off personal responsibility and continue on a comfortable course. A suburbanite may throw up his hands and blame local ranchers and farmers for blocking the reintroduction of wolves into the Intermountain West. The same suburbanite, however, could replant his subdivision property with native plants and, if he stops using pesticides, could welcome back the native bugs and birds his own landscaping kills off and drives away. The tendency of urban and suburban 165 non-hunters to demonize individuals who hunt is another example. An eth- ical elk hunter may kill one animal a year, but the foothill subdivisions and golf courses built by urban and suburban people eliminate whole herds of elk permanently by destroying their winter range. Of course, sympathy with the plight of an individual animal is not a character defect; honest hunters feel it too. But ethical hunters limit their kill and know they must preserve elk’s winter and summer range, however inconvenient, in order to keep these animals around. At the same time, many wildlife policies promoted by special interest groups in the name of hunters, ranchers, and farmers should cause alarm. Definitely, our present habitat conservation problems are intensified when, through cultural inertia, we follow wildlife policies of the past. Until the middle of the twentieth century, while the Intermountain West was pow- ered by an agricultural economy, wildlife management centered on the goals of a rural population. Ranchers and farmers didn’t want predators, such as wolves, bears, and cougars, around to prey on their domestic animals, so native predators were treated as vermin and exterminated. This is still hap- pening to some extent today. Also, when Utah’s population was primarily rural, hunting and fishing were the most popular outdoor sports. Catering to sportsmen, wildlife managers introduced exotic species, such as pheasant and rainbow trout, to the detriment of native animals. Persecuting native predators and using wildlife management to pro- mote a cash crop of game species seems strange—even offensive—to today’s primarily urban and suburban population. Interest in hunting has declined dramatically, and today’s Intermountain West residents are likely to spend their time outdoors mountain biking, picnicking, or wildlife watching. Wildlife managers are turning to more holistic ways of dealing with wildlife and habitat. The crash in the popularity of hunting has another, less beneficial, con- sequence. In the past, wildlife managers funded habitat management and preservation with the taxes and licenses paid by people who hunt and fish. With the decline in hunting, money for protecting habitat—game or nongame—is scarce. Most urban and suburban people think that some- where, some state agency is spending significant amounts of money on nongame animal habitat. But that’s not happening. Worse, those most often responsible for wildlife habitat loss today are urban and suburban people who pay no direct remedial costs for it. Often 166 CREATURES OF HABITAT city-dwellers believe they’re part of the solution to environmental problems simply because they’re not overgrazing public land with livestock or not hunting mule deer. But urban and suburban growth is fueling the new dams, highways, subdivisions, strip malls, golf courses, and ski runs that collective- ly are having a colossal negative impact on native wildlife habitat today. Undoubtedly, water projects are most devastating to native wildlife. Dammed rivers drown riparian habitat underneath reservoirs. These river- sides are critical habitat for native wildlife. For example, streamsides support three-quarters of the kinds of birds that visit Utah. The water level of man- made reservoirs rises and falls on a daily cycle—sometimes by twenty feet— as it fills and empties according to needs of dam operators. Evolution hasn’t prepared native species to live on this type of constantly fluctuating shore- line, so reservoirs support very few native species. Drowning the critical habitat of riversides for water projects is recklessly wasteful when you con- sider that half of the water is used to keep ornamental lawns green in urban and suburban areas. Turning native landscapes into outdoor playgrounds, such as golf cours- es and ski resorts, is another example. These modified environments sup- port many fewer native species and encourage nonnative species to invade. Of course, the problem isn’t a few ski runs or a few holes of golf. It’s the relentless nibbling to death of native landscapes by a growing urban popu- lation that’s divorced from natural processes. We value what we know and we no longer know what’s wild. In fact, we no longer require wildness from our wilderness areas. Because so few natural landscapes survive, the ones that remain—national and state parks and wildlife refuges—are becoming islands of natural habi- tat in a sea of land transformed for human use. But preserving pockets of native landscapes surrounded by areas of severe human impact doesn’t work over meaningful periods of time. Nature’s not just a place, it’s a process; and natural processes are often big and inconvenient. Native landscapes need buffer zones and connections with each other or the woven fabric of plant and animal interactions begins to unravel. But we treat these parks as play- grounds—big outdoor adventure parks—complete with paved roads, a sur- rounding fence, and ticket booths and souvenir shops at the entrance, and nature won’t stay behind the gate—remember Jurassic Park? More to the point, fences won’t keep weeds and feral animals from invading these remaining natural areas and taming them over time. 167 NATURE’S BOUNDARIES ARE FEATURES such as watersheds, but humans divide land into private and public ownership. There is as much critical wildlife habitat on private land as there is on public land, but near- ly all attention in the conservation debate is focused on how much public land—Bureau of Land Management and U.S. Forest Service land—to pre- serve in formal wilderness areas. The 1964 Wilderness Act set up the National Wilderness Preservation System, which was intended to ensure that some public landscapes could be preserved in a natural condition for the benefit and enjoyment of current and future generations of Americans. The Wilderness Act shouldn’t be con- fused with the 1973 Endangered Species Act, which the U.S. Congress passed to preserve native plants and animals identified as threatened by extinction. When it comes to preserving Utah’s remaining federally owned natural areas by means of the Wilderness Act, interest groups on one side of the debate say the cost in lost economic opportunities is too high; they point out that mining and timber harvest are banned within designated wilder- ness areas (though grazing domestic animals is allowed). Also, opponents say that wilderness designation puts economic limitations on surrounding communities and limits land management and motorized recreation options within these areas. Those in favor of formally designating many millions of acres of Utah public land as wilderness point out that while extractive industries, like mining and timber, were an important part of the state’s economy in the past, that’s no longer true today. Wilderness supporters say preserving these remaining natural landscapes will draw tourists and recreational visitors, thereby benefitting the businesses in the surrounding communities who cater to them. The argument that protecting large natural areas with wilderness desig- nation will create magnets for tourists makes an economic point. On the other hand, it emphasizes the preservation of aesthetically pleasing mountains and canyons as outdoor playgrounds, rather than the protection of the less charming places, such as wetlands and creek drainages that, while not dra- matic, are much more important to native wildlife. In the current public land debate, protecting habitat takes a back seat to tourism and outdoor recreation. Still, it is true that many of the remaining native plants and animals in our region can be protected by official wilderness designation of public 168 CREATURES OF HABITAT land. The scientific overview is already done. As pointed out in earlier chap- ters, seven scientists from Brigham Young University and the University of Utah assessed the potential of designating wilderness areas in Utah specifi- cally to conserve native ecosystems. The result was a paper entitled “Selecting Wilderness Areas to Conserve Utah’s Biological Diversity,” pub- lished in the April 1996 Great Basin Naturalist. “Among the significant eco- logical functions of wilderness areas is their role in conserving biological diversity,” these local scientists write. And, as opposed to scenic values and outdoor recreation, the local scientists suggest these criteria for designating wilderness areas: (1) ensure the long-term population viability of native animal and plant species, (2) maintain the critical ecological and evolutionary processes upon which these species depend, and (3) preserve the full range of communities, successional states, and environmental gradients . . . to protect large, contiguous areas, and to buffer wilderness areas with mul- tiple-use public lands . . . conserve entire watersheds . . . and protect native communities from invasions of exotic species. The logic is tough to dispute. The Endangered Species Act commits Americans to preventing extinction of native wildlife, so it makes sense to protect their functioning habitat while it’s still in one piece. Using scientific criteria for determining wilderness designation, as these local scientists propose, can bring diverse groups, such as hunters, wildlife watchers, and conservationists into the same camp. Scientific cri- teria is not like aesthetic criteria; it’s objective. Biodiversity can be meas- ured and counted. A wild place without wildlife is just pretty scenery, and that’s not suffi- cient for those who know and value wildness. Fortunately, wildlife watch- ing is quietly becoming one of the most popular outdoor activities with the Intermountain West’s urban and suburban population. In fact, bird watch- ing is the fastest growing outdoor sport in Utah. This will increase the pub- lic’s biological literacy and may change the wilderness debate. Wildlife watching is a path that begins with appreciating species, then leads to valu- ing the biological diversity of the native landscapes they depend upon. After all, birdwatchers soon learn that creatures like native bugs, which few peo- ple prize in themselves, play a critical role in attracting birds and preserving 169 the natural system in which everything else they value can thrive. Wildlife watching is recreation but it’s also an education. The growing popularity of wildlife watching is no secret to state and fed- eral wildlife managers; they are beginning to manage natural areas so the pub- lic can watch nongame animals. Across the country, wildlife managers have collaborated with conservation organizations in a program named Watchable Wildlife. The first phase of Watchable Wildlife’s program, state-by-state pub- lication of wildlife viewing locations, is completed (see Appendix C). In the future, wildlife managers will be adding viewing blinds, platforms, parking, and restrooms at wildlife watching locations. While the noisy civic debate is over conservation of public land, many nonprofit organizations are quietly working to set aside private land as open space and habitat. These groups range from the Nature Conservancy, which buys land operating on the principle that nothing should go extinct, to Ducks Unlimited, which protects and restores wetlands. With these goals, they don’t have to worry whether habitat will get support from a majority of the public because it’s not pretty scenery. The natural landscapes of the Intermountain West are still reeling from many of yesterday’s wildlife management practices. At the same time, we increasingly pave over what’s left to accommodate today’s intense human population growth. That means many native plants, animals, and habitats are in a race with extinction. Hunters, ranchers, farmers, and city-dwelling conservationists can, as individuals, each help protect remaining open space and reclaim some of what is lost. It takes a commitment to understand, to acknowledge, and then to reduce individual contributions to the problem of habitat destruction. It’s not too late. We in the Intermountain West are privileged to still have wild places in which we can see, for example, a dusty bighorn ewe and lamb crossing an impossibly narrow canyon ledge, or places where we can spend a mountain morning watching a chubby pika fussily arranging its tiny haystack of dried grass. So, don’t wait to get out there to see them. Do it now. g 170 CREATURES OF HABITAT