rnasa bulletin 
LIKE OUR NEW NAME? We do, too. 
STUPIFYING AND CATACLYSMIC is 
the idea of Jerzy Hauptmann resigning as 
Executive Secretary of MASA. The mind 
searches in vain, as the nineteenth-century 
magazinists liked to say, for hypothetical 
precedents of comparable enormity. 
Buddha resigning from Buddhism? The 
Marquis de Sade from sadism? Washing­
ton turning in his sword two weeks before 
Yorktown? 
All those years of selfless service! MASA's 
only continuity! 
Dogged inverter of English sentence struc­
ture! Majestic manipulator of trusts and 
foundations! The only treasurer in his­
tory, as one member put it, able to man­
age an organization with no income and 
many outgoes and keep it in the black! 
The only Republican ever to please, total­
ly, an entirely Democratic constituency! 
Perhaps the real measure of Jerzy's con­
tribution to the organization is not our 
consternation at his resignation—he had 
abundantly good reasons, related to his 
prominence in his field, his editorship of 
a journal, pressing responsibilities as 
chairman of a department and as admin­
istrator at his college—but that he gave a 
thankless, unsalaried and unglamorous of­
fice sufficient dignity that not one but two 
very good MASA members were willing to 
step forth and offer themselves up as 
replacements. The executive board meet­
ing on the evening of March 26, 1971 was 
thus faced for the first time in MASA 
history with a contested election. 
"Contested" perhaps has the wrong con­
notations. Through a comedy of errors, 
two different names had been suggested 
independently, both of good men willing 
to have a crack at this impossible job. 
The matter was settled with commend­
able amicability and even a certain 
amount of healthy MASA hilarity. The 
new Executive Secretary will be Robert 
Corrigan of the American Civilization 
Program at the University of Iowa. In 
Corrigan we think we have found a 
wheeler and dealer of truly Hauptmannian
proportions who, like his predecessor, 
combines energy, know-how and high 
ethical standards. Friends of the new 
Executive Secretary are urged to keep an 
eye on him, to serve him milk at cocktail 
parties, to be sure he gets plenty of sleep, 
and to watch for telltale tics and gray 
bags under his eyes. 
AT THE SUGGESTION of Professor 
Wayne Wheeler of our editorial board, we 
are going to try separate meetings of the 
editorial and executive boards beginning 
in the fall of 1971 when both boards will 
meet in Parkville, Missouri. The thought 
is that separate meetings will allow more 
time for the picky details of journal 
operations, while still allowing the Editor 
and Chairman of the editorial board to 
present large scale problems to the as­
sembled executives. If the plan works 
well, it will be used again in the spring, 
1972, general meeting of the chapter. 
THE 1972 MEETING will be at Park 
College in Parkville, Missouri. Jerzy 
Hauptmann (who?) has volunteered to heprogram
chairman, which means he is 
currently our Vice-President and will be 
President in another year. 
HERE IS THE PROGRAM for the 
spring, 1971 meeting. The general topic 
was Women in America. 
"Women's Liberation and Its Impact on 
the Campus"—Jo Freeman, University of 
Chicago 
"The Male Sociologist's Burden: The Place 
of Women in Marriage and Family Texts" 
—Carol Ehrlich, University of Iowa 
"The Loneliness of the Long Distance 
Mother"—Pauline Bart, University of Illi­
nois, Chicago Medical Center 
"The Airline Hostess: The Sociology of a 
Special Opportunity Occupation"—Elizabeth 
Continued on page 90 
 masa bulletin 
Continued from page 4 
Moles and Norman Friedman, California 
State College at Los Angeles 
"Major Themes in the Nondomestic History 
of American Women"—Janet Wilson James, 
Radcliffe College 
"From the Kinzie Mansion to the Palmer 
Mansion: Continuity and Progression 
Among the Women of Chicago in the 
Nineteenth Century"—Ann Massa, Univer­
sity of Leeds 
"Handmaids of Tradit ion: Women Teach­
ers in America, 1830-1860"—Keith Melder, 
Smithsonian Institution 
"Clinging Vine or Independent Elm: The 
Feminists, the Church and the Struggle for 
a New Image of Woman in Ante-bellum 
America"—Barbara Ellingson-Waugh, Uni­
versity of Chicago Divinity School 
"Women's Magazines: Feminine Conscious­
ness, Past and Present"—Ruth Rosen, Uni­
versity of California at Berkeley 
"A New Feminine Mystique?"—Mary Jane 
Harmon, University of Kansas 
"Cinderella Revisited: The Feminine Image 
in the Novels of Mary Stewart, Victoria 
Holt and Phyllis Whitney"—Kay Mussell, 
University of Iowa 
"Coring the Apple: Myth-Making in Ladies' 
Magazine Fiction"—Mary Dunlop, Iowa 
State University 
"The Iron Madonna: The Culmination in 
Muckracking Fiction of a Nineteenth-Cen­
tury American Stereotype of Women"— 
Barry Hayne, University of Toronto 
American Studies has rights of first re­
fusal on all papers given at MASA con­
ventions; presumably, a number of these 
good papers will be accepted for publica­
tion, and will appear either as a special 
issue or as a special section in a general 
issue in a future number of our magazine. 
Consensus of participants in the conven­
tion was that chairman Norman Yetman 
had assembled an unusually rich and 
valuable program. Attendance was very 
good, and the papers seemed to "speak to 
one another" in a healthy way. There 
was, moreover, a good mix geographical 
and professional: the speakers ranged 
from graduate students to professors well 
established in their fields, and the insti­
tutions represented ranged in location 
from Great Britain to the California coast. 
THE MASA CHOWDER, BOURBON 
PUNCH, MARCHING AND PHILHAR­
MONIC SOCIETY was in full cry at the 
Friday night soiree and stomp which fol­
lowed the executive board meeting and 
preceded by only a few hours the Satur­
day morning sessions. The brawl broke 
up at about 3:15, and your Editor's wife 
reports that something in excess of a 
hundred and forty celebrants were there 
to toast the retiring Executive Secretary, 
special issues of the journal past, present 
and future, the new slate of officers, and 
seventy or eighty other persons and topics. 
Seventy-seven sturdy choruses of the 
MASA Blues poured out of the music 
room, wherein the Philharmonic played 
no less than six sets. Personnel varied, 
but for the sake of Metronome when AllStar
nomination time rolls around, the 
pianist was Terry Buchanan, an uniden­
tified gent with a beard played drums 
until the rumpus awakened the Editor's 
six-year old son, who sat in from 11:00 
until 2:00 a.m.; Tim Miller played lead 
guitar, electric and acoustic; Jim Austin, 
by special arrangement with the Old 
Guys' Jazz Band, contributed a gritty and 
solid trombone; Ernie Grundy was there 
with sound trumpet work in Handy's 
"Loveless Love," and your humble cor­
respondent committed certain abomina­
tions on the trumpet, banjo and guitar. 
At certain memorable moments, a toy 
electric organ was in use, as was a battery 
of percussion instruments. 
Robert Buchanan served in his new posi­
tion as Assistant Punchmaster. The up­
state returns are not yet in, but our im­
pression is that seventeen gallons of 
punch, 100 pounds of ice and six gallons 
of bourbon are no more. 
PUFFERY II: In response to the editor's 
request for some immodest remarks about 
the activities of American Civilization 
people at the University of Iowa, the fol­
lowing comments are offered for a friend­
ly, if critical, MASA audience. Iowa's 
program over the last few years has 
assumed an increasingly important role 
on the campus as legitimate student de­
mands for academic relevancy and flex­
ibility have gained a fair hearing from 
the central administration. We are the 
home of the new interdisciplinary pro­
gram in Afro-American culture, the source 
of courses on Women in America, and 
one of the developers of the undergrad­
uate environmental studies program. In 
addition, the program has pioneered in 
providing supervised training in under­
graduate instruction for Ph.D. candidates 
who wish to become teachers as well as 
Continued on page 91 
90 
 masa bulletin 
Continued from page 90 
scholars. The undergraduate introductory 
course, staffed largely by graduate stu­
dents, is elected by six hundred nonmajors
a year and several hundred others 
are turned away annually for lack of 
space. 
The chairman of the program, Alexander 
C. Kern, is a member of the editorial 
board of the Henry David Thoreau edi­
tion being prepared under the auspices 
of the CEAA and will spend the fall se­
mester in Chicago working on one of the 
three volumes he will edit for the series. 
Sherman Paul, a member of the executive 
committee of the program, has just pub­
lished a major essay on the poetry of 
Gary Snyder in The Iowa Revieiu, a book 
on William Carlos Williams, a volume of 
his own poetry, and saw the third edition 
of Emerson's Angle of Vision through the 
Harvard Press. Charles T. Davis, who 
joined the program this year as chairman 
of the Committee on Afro-American 
Studies, has just published On Being 
Black: Writings by Afro-Americans from 
Frederick Douglass to the Present and is 
at work on book length studies of E. A. 
Robinson and Walt Whitman, and a 
critical survey of the Harlem Renaissance. 
Robert A. Corrigan, executive secretary 
for both American Civilization and AfroAmerican
Studies, just accepted a $56,000 
grant from the National Endowment for 
the Humanities to aid in the development 
of the Afro-American program. He is 
currently at work on finishing a complete 
revision of his book-length manuscript on 
the political and social role of Ezra Pound 
and bringing out a definitive edition of 
the poetry of Michael Wigglesworth. A 
second edition of American Fiction and 
Verse, an anthology for use in European 
universities, co-edited with former MASA 
member John Hancock, has recently been 
published. 
WE HAVE had other responses to our 
suggestion that MASA members use this 
column to announce interesting new 
scholarship and publications. Professor 
Edward L. Schapsmeier of Illinois State 
University tells us that he and his 
brother, Frederick, have just come out 
with a volume published by Iowa State 
University Press, entitled Prophet in Poli­
tics: Henry A. Wallace and the War 
Years. Robert Hemenway, who was guest 
editorial consultant for "Perceptions of 
Black America," our last issue, has also in 
print a handsome new anthology, The 
Black Novelist, published by the Charles 
E. Merrill Publishing Company. 
HARVARD STUDIES IN URBAN HIS­
TORY is the title of an interesting-sound­
ing new series for which we have received 
an announcement. The editors are Ste­
phen Thernstrom, History, UCLA, and 
Charles Tilley, Sociology and History, 
Michigan; the publisher is Harvard Uni­
versity Press. Manuscripts are welcomed. 
THE AFRO-AMERICAN STUDIES 
PROGRAM at the University of Iowa an­
nounces an institute on "Richard Wright 
and His Influence," scheduled for July 
18-31, 1971. For further information con­
tact Robert Corrigan, Institute for AfroAmerican
Culture, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, Iowa 52240. 
READERS ARE URGED to examine 
American Studies new book review policy, 
as announced in Volume 11, Number 2. 
We are currently soliciting review articles 
which conform to the general format 
therein described. 
GRATIFYINGLY GOOD THINGS are 
being said about our last issue, "Percep­
tions of Black America." Hemenway, 
Yetman and your Editor, the guilty 
parties, admit that it came out better than 
we thought it would. A thoughtful note 
from a leading scholar calls it the best 
thing of its sort yet published: that not 
only pleased us, but surprised us, too. It 
cost too much to print, though, so if you 
feel it's all that good, please adapt it for 
class use. For a measly $2.50 your students 
will own "the best thing of its sort," and 
American Studies will survive to print 
another special issue. 
FOREIGN LIBRARY SUBSCRIPTIONS 
T O AMERICAN STUDIES: Between one 
and fourteen libraries in the following 
countries are receiving copies of Ameri­
can Studies. 
Puerto Rico El Salvador New Zealand 
China England Nicaragua 
Cuba Finland Nigeria 
Germany France Norway 
South Africa Guatemala Panama 
Africa Holland Paraguay 
Australia Honduras Peru 
Austria Hungary Philippines 
Belgium India Poland 
Bolivia Israel Rumania 
Brasil Wales Scotland 
Canada Italy Sweden 
Chile Jamaica Spain 
Colombia Japan Turkey 
Costa Rica Korea Uruguay 
Czechoslovakia Malta USSR 
Denmark Mexico Venezuela 
Ecuador Netherlands Yugoslavia 
91 
