epilogue Survival and Persistence: The Lineages and Legacies of the Early American Movement The slaves who buried the last of John Brown’s raiders shared the location with Gabriel Newby, the brother of Dangerfield. Decades later, these local African Americans told some sympathetic whites. In late July 1899, a group of them—free now but still moving in secret and at night—sunk their shovels into a washed-out slope overlooking the river. They struck the remains of a soaked mud-filled coffin after only three feet, and quickly gathered the remaining bones into a trunk. Professor Orin Grant Libby, the nephew of Charles Plummer Tidd, then smuggled them out of Virginia. Another group simultaneously retrieved the remains of those buried at Perth Amboy. They all converged on the old Brown farm near North Elba, where he had been buried. In a short ceremony on August 30, Dick Hinton personally reminisced about each of the ten men whose bones went into a single coffin placed alongside John Brown’s.1 Within months, the last of the century that had inspired their hopes faded into history, and Hinton himself left on a research trip to England from which he would not return in hopeful pursuit of Brown’s connections to the revolutionary movement in Europe. Already, liberal ideas of a gradual, inexorable “progress” had begun to come to the fore. Not the old spirit of change but the nosier, more tangible, and profitable wheels of industry would define what that could mean. Contrary to the hopes of the old radicals, no lesson would be learned so thoroughly as not to require a continued relearning. Already, a much more powerful Federal Union crushed the last of the free and independent native peoples, and established a system of racial apartheid, while showing no interest in preventing the systemic lynchings of African Americans largely enslaved by impoverishment. The women 191 long road to harpers ferry who had anticipated equal rights in the war’s aftermath remained subor- dinate, and that the right of property trumped the human rights of those without property remained as persistent as ever. Of course, so did the radical critique of these notions. History and the Domestication of the Past John Brown’s soul may been marching on, as the old song ran, but the authorities began mapping its permissible course no sooner than they had hanged him. U.S. Senators James M. Mason and Jefferson Davis launched a formal committee to investigate Harpers Ferry. The official probe hinted at a dark, hidden conspiracy. They investigated the activities of Brown’s followers in Kansas. Although Hugh Forbes had left for Italy to fight rejoin the campaigns of Giuseppe Garibaldi and his old comrades, the New York Herald bribed his landlord to seize his trunk before it could be sent on.2 Ultimately, officialdom thought it wiser to minimize the importance of the raid. In the end, they embraced the description of Brown as a lunatic, casting his allies and friends as deluded. This suited many in the North, including the more moderate critics of slavery. The basis for Brown’s posthumous diagnosis was not taking up arms in a nation which had resorted to arms over such questions for years, but his uncompro- mising advocacy of the abolition of property rights in human beings. Indeed, this reflects the broad predispositions of those with power and wealth to rationalize their standing and the status quo. “Utopian extremes cannot long live upon the soil of this Republic,” the New York Times told itself. The “Red Republican Jacobinism” of Tom Paine, it noted with little regard for accuracy, had “died before he did.” Such currents “have been succeeded by myriads of others, each of which has been equally short-lived.” In other words, radicalism demonstra- bly had no place in the American experience because it died as soon as it appeared, the Times complaining that it cropped up repeatedly in “myriads.” Behind the first official burial of Paine ’s legacy, for example, Gilbert Vale, Horace Seaver, Josiah Mendum and many others kept it quite alive, as did younger radicals, such as the union printer Joseph N. Moreau, whose projected biography of Paine would be cut short in 1863 by secessionist lead.3 192 survival and persistence In reality, Brown was the product of a long and self-conscious radical continuity. After the investigation struck on “the Secret Six,” New England officials descended on the Concord home of Franklin Benjamin Sanborn, in hopes of getting him to Boston, and thence to Washington. Almost immediately, his neighbors surrounded and seized the deputies until lawyers could file papers to save Sanborn, after which they also began planning “to appear in force at the state supreme-court room.” In the wake of Brown’s hanging, Hinton, who had stopped by the home of Wendell Phillips to escort him to a meeting, saw the mild-mannered Boston gentleman slip a Colt revolver from his desk drawer to his inside pocket. At that meeting, Phillips found the stage protected by “over 400 gallant young fellows in the hall ready to offer their lives in his defense.” Such figures organized in hopes of making a mass armed raid into Virginia to free the prisoners.4 All this implied organization. The platforms of the meetings commemorating John Brown and the raid not only included names prominent in abolitionism—black and white—but former Owenites and Fourierists, as well as participants in the annual conventions around freethought, women’s rights, and land reform. Over a generation, these distinctions had come to mean less and less, a process hastened by the influx of the refugees of the European revolutionary movements. The rescue network evolved into the variously named League of Freedom or John Brown League, which served as an abolitionist “Minute Man” organization. They functioned as a paramilitary secret society, with secret signs, grips, passwords and obligations such as the Carbonari or the Blanquists on the continent. Members took “a binding oath ... to engage in no occupation that could prevent our marching at an hour’s notice, and to obey an order to march without question.” One member later estimated that it “numbered 25,000 members, scattered through Kansas, Iowa, Northern Ohio, New York and Canada.”5 Although surely exaggerated in numbers, what they represented was essentially the professionalization of revolutionary politics in America. Participants included the usual suspects. Black and white veterans of the Underground Railroad formed something of a core, but if that “league” assumed anything like the numbers attributed to it, it would have absorbed what remained of that loose internationalist network of radicals that Forbes had constructed. Certainly, Karl Heinzen imme- diately began “to organize a force of Turners.” Joseph Déjacque 193 long road to harpers ferry praised Brown in Le Libertaire, and the Polish speaker at a meeting of his countrymen “made some very lengthy remarks about John Brown and Harpers Ferry, eulogizing Brown as a hero of the first order, whom he regarded as a victim of the slave power. Slavery he denounced as a crime equal to assassination.” Later, Giuseppe Garibaldi himself offered to return to the U.S. and fight for the Union on the condition that it take up the cause of the Harpers Ferry raiders. The German Jewish secularist Max Langenschwartz described history as “but the record of a perpetual struggle for social equality,” adding that “talking is of no use. His remedy for social wrongs is revolution. ... His model Reformer is John Brown. He would make every despot a head shorter.”6 To them—and to growing numbers in the North—the conduct of the Virginia authorities and their apologists reflected the aggressive desper- ation of a threatened elite. The fact that the slaveholders had law and the institutions of power on their side had come to matter less and less to the people of the non-slaveholding states. “I think that for once the Sharp’s rifles and the revolvers were employed in a righteous cause,” declared the long-standing pacifist Henry David Thoreau. “The tools were in the hands of one who could use them,” he declared in “A Plea for Captain John Brown,” who “has a spark of divinity in him.” The antislavery religious weekly the Independent agreed that the raid may have been “insane,” but “the controlling motive of his demonstration was sublime.” The intransigence of the old order seemed so inoffensive that it stirred a respectable health reformer such as Dr. James C. Jackson to look up from his fresh water and vegetables. The emerging conflict had clarified “the true position of the people of the North, and the people of this country; and it seems to me that this position is one of revolution! We are, whether we will it or not, in the midst of a revolution!” In this, he declared, “our sympathies are with the mass of the people.”7 The Radical Abolitionists persisted in keeping the broader antislavery movement from getting too comfortable. In May, they hosted a broader gathering at Boston that drew nationally prominent spiritualists such as Bela Marsh and John Pierpont, as well as Hinton and James Redpath. Their stated goal was no less than to consider forming a new party, as the German socialists had recently advocated.8 The Radical Abolitionists held their national convention at Syracuse towards the end of August. Frederick Douglass, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, 194 survival and persistence and Charles C. Foote heard an opening appeal from William S. Bailey, the Southern editor of the Free South. They formulated a militant platform: “we demand at the hands of our National Government, a Homestead Bill, which shall not only leave every landless settler the opportunity to acquire a home without money and without cost (save the cost of transfer.) but we also demand of it a statute against land monopoly.” Embracing the legacy of John Brown, they nominated Gerrit Smith for president. “The ballot-box, if used to that end would speedily bring slavery to a peaceful death,” he replied. “But the ballot-box must be left to serve slavery, and slavery must be left to go out in blood.”9 Yet, hoping against hope, Smith and other radicals generally wound up supporting the insurgent campaign of Abraham Lincoln. The Republican victory in the November elections heralded that anticipated “Second American Revolution,” though not in a straight- forward way. With the election of Abraham Lincoln, the governments of the Southern states voted to secede from the United States, and, in April 1861, opened fire on Fort Sumter, forcing the hand of the new government. As the war loomed longer and larger, it forced more innovative and far-reaching measures on the Federal authorities. The Lincoln administration promulgated a radical wartime monetary policy centered on printing paper currency and a progressive income tax. 1862 finally brought a Federal Homestead Act—land reform seriously shorn of its most radical features—and the fall brought a proclamation eman- cipating those slaves held in Confederate territory. In the end, the very power structure that had found it convenient to treat Harpers Ferry as the work of lunatics embraced that very “lunacy” as a national policy. Radicals themselves had anticipated something like this. Lucius A. Hine had long expected that events would “bring more skillful anti-slavery players to the board.” They would sway “public sentiment that they [slaveholders] will soon be unable to make anything out of it.” In hindsight, Hinton thought that Kansas had brought in “growing northern and western business interests” to bear. “The danger of the possible nationalization of slavery or the threatened dissolution of the union,” he continued, “was so imminent that business and ethics fused into statesmanship.”10 Radical participation in the war pushed this process along. The handful of Brown’s raiders that had survived Harpers Ferry entered the service of the Union. Officers and participants in the ranks of abolition- 195 long road to harpers ferry ist, land reform and socialist currents donned the uniform and took up arms. While conditions back in Europe drew many of the Italian and French radicals back to their homelands, the largest remaining bloc, the Germans threw themselves heavily into the war effort. Beyond the war, a looming reconstruction increasingly posed the question of what kind of Union they hoped to restore, a matter for which the radicals already had an agenda of sorts. Too, by the time of the war, radical currents of all sorts discussed “slavery” as more than the “chattel slavery” ended by wartime emancipation. In that sense, they expected Republicanism, Unionism, and Reconstruction to go far beyond. Harriet Tubman and African American participants in the underground—with legions of others fleeing slavery—would carry such aspirations into the war and beyond. None of this could happen without addressing those systemic exclusions—and we mean by this the exclusion of entire peoples and not the cosmetic acceptance of symbolic tokens—would leave a recon- structed republic little more than a mere aggregate of exploitable human beings rather than a community of citizens. Alvan E. Bovay described a prerequisite for radical reform in reconciling the aspirations and concerns of the “Spanish, Indian, Negro, and Anglo-Saxon races” in the New World. Peter H. Clark spoke to a gathering that included many who had shared this view. “The doctrine of the universal brotherhood of man is the foundation of all good government in the world,” he argued. “If you wish to abolish Slavery, you must combat it wherever it is found, wither in political parties, in churches, or in your own homes.”11 For a brief period, Unionist radicalism threatened to integrate the maroon traditions into American experience. Even as Brown and his people created alliances with Ottawa Jones and Baptiste Peoria, John Beeson, a white farmer in Oregon, overtly advocated the resistance of various tribal groups in what became the “Rouge River War.” Beeson took representatives of the Indians touring the country under the spon- sorship of antislavery whites and blacks, culminating in a mass wartime meeting for native rights under the dome of the U.S. capitol. The Lincoln administration appointed an ad hoc commission, consisting of three critics of Indian policy, including Augustus Wattles, who had already advocated dual citizenship for native peoples and civic equality within the United States. One of his cousins from Nebraska joined W. A. Phillips, Hinton and others and raised a tri-racial Federal Union 196 survival and persistence army on the western border. The last of the great Seminole war chiefs, Su-nuk-mik-ko (also known as Halpatter Micco or, among the whites, “Billy Bowlegs”)—a man who had fought the U.S. to a standstill over many years back in Florida—took an officer’s commission in its ranks and died in the service of the Union. The antebellum settlement of Quindaro, Kansas on the Missouri River embodied this convergence. The population included Indians, who had originally owned the land and were not dispossessed. It became a conduit for escaped slaves heading north and white Free Staters coming into the territory, some of whom remained. One of its most prominent residents, Clarina I. H. Nichols, had joined the Wattles and other of John Brown’s allies to found the territory’s first woman’s rights organization. Too, leaders that had emerged from the women’s conventions of the decade, such as Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth C. Stanton, and Ernestine Rose had also participated in broader radical deliberations. In the wake of the war, Stone and Anthony forged a remarkably efficient organizing team. The postwar spread of the agitation for women’s rights had deep abolitionist roots, particularly in that part of the movement concerned with politics and advocating a broad social program that included radical land reform and economic egalitarianism. While many factors disinclined the Second American Revolution from meeting the radical aspirations it inspired, it marked a qualitative shift in American radical history. In organizational terms, the veteran American land reformers and the German émigrés formerly associated with Hugh Forbes re-established their alliance a decade later in the International Workingmen’s Association. John Commerford first wrote Karl Marx on their behalf, and their ranks included most of those with whom he had worked for decades still in the land of the living. The Brotherhood of the Union directly contributed to the wartime emergence of the Union Leagues, which went south and became overtly radical largely in the African American political current, and provided some of the founders of the Knights of Labor. Antebellum politics and political issues continued to inspire radical activism through the century. The “land question” became essential to the programs of groups as diverse as the Knight, the IWA, and the succession of independent political parties ranging from the early Republicans through the Greenbackers to the Populists. That rather mild latter-day land reformer Henry George wrote, “that absolute political 197 long road to harpers ferry equality does not in itself prevent the tendency to inequality involved in the private ownership of land.” Wealth remained no less polarized in the U.S. because “simple citizens” rather than nobles controlled the “thousands of miles of railroad, millions of acres of land, the means of livelihood of great numbers of men; who name the governors of sovereign states as they name their clerks, choose senators as they choose attorneys, and whose will is as supreme with legislatures as that of a French king sitting in a bed of justice.”12 By then, the last of the old land reformers were holding the last of their gatherings as the “National Land Reform Association.” A number of them were in or around the emergence of distinct socialist parties in the 1870s. The list included prominent Fourierists such as John Orvis, Alcander Longley, and J. Homer Doucet, as well as veterans of abolitionism and land reform, such as Peter H. Clark and William West. Indeed, the story unfolded most clearly in their local communities. For the first century of national existence, what proved to be the most effective radicalism fostered the movement of the most people on a principled basis, independent from the conservatizing entangle- ments with the institutional power structure. Indeed, the builders of a genuinely distinct and independent American Left paradoxically learned that radicalism, to be effective, could not be distinct and independent of the people it sought to serve. Decades of experience had taught them that talk was ultimately cheap. The owners and rulers of the society prattle endlessly about democratic values, egalitarianism, and community, and a self-gratifying radicalism that ultimately did no more than talk would not suffice. Radicals not only act to promote such goals but cannot actually foster them without, in some small part, leading in demonstrating that such goals are practical and must be, in some important respect, implemented. Serious radicalism does not even try to pull a movement out of thin air or build it to a blueprint. The women’s movement posed an unarguably correct critique of the new United States and its civilization, but its founders had to take their concerns into movements around other issues, particularly the antislavery movement. Freethought and land reform offered a thoroughly principled—even revolutionary—perspective on the American experience, but their concerns mattered only in that adherents were willing to carry them into a broader movement hostile 198 survival and persistence to—and resisting of—the constitutional and legal ownership of human beings. Within the spectrum of legitimate, principled concerns, serious radicals learned the power of the people moving independently of the dead-end institutional channels of designated authority. The logic of mass self-organization naturally generated new layers of leadership, and expanded the power of the movement. In Kansas, that power had defeated Congress, the presidency, the Supreme Court, and the military. Growing power carried extensive responsibilities, primarily to cultivate and sustain the process. That is, participants needed to keep the movement as massive and principled as possible, which meant avoiding the perennial systemic efforts to undercut its independence with electoral politics. Had the early movement sought to subvert human slavery by voting for the lesser evil proslavery candidates of the proslavery parties, they would have contributed to their own marginalization, and salved nothing but their own bruised sensibilities. The weight of institutional power systemically offers a comfortingly symbolic assuagement without any substantive change. For this reason, if no other, radicalism offers no lessons that can be simply won and built upon. All need continual relearning, and a democracy systemically refreshed. There are no lessons of the past that are not lessons of the present. So, long after their death, John Brown and his men could inspire that second raid on Harpers Ferry. No university rewarded Professor Libby any grants or chairs for his role in commemorating Harpers Ferry. Neither of the Tidds had survived the war. Libby had managed to survive the new history graduate program at the University of Wisconsin, where he impressed Frederick Jackson Turner enough to be kept on at Wisconsin. However, his peers saw his serious interest in science as a lack of focus on history, and his research focus on such subjects as the Greenback and Populist movements irritated them. Later, after exposing the plagiarism of two other historians, Libby would find himself driven out of his job at Wisconsin and forced to take a teaching post in North Dakota, where his compilation of Arikara versions of the Custer massacre pioneered the documentation of western history from an Indian perspective.13 In so institutionally conservative a profession as history, Libby’s being on the real cutting edge, by definition, left him on the margins of the field. 199 long road to harpers ferry * * * Like that handful of black and white admirers of the antebellum radicals working to disinter the bones of John Brown’s men, radicals labor with no media fanfare, no fair recourse to the courts, and no grants. Meta- phorically, they, too, may have to wait until nightfall and slip beyond the streetlights of Harpers Ferry, stumbling their own way through the darkness of the woods beyond sight of the town. When they relocated the spot they wanted, they put shovels into the muddy earth until they uncovered the crumbling bones of the executed raiders. Notwithstanding a culture of intellectual arrogance and institutional neglect, the graveyards of the past remain as embattled and muddied as the present. It is, after all, part of the same living struggle that has continued. 200