9
Are the United States still the «God’s Country»?
Franco Ferrarotti
Prof. Emeritus of La Sapienza University, Italy 
Founder of La Critica Sociologica
Abstract
Arriving to the «new world» across the Atlantic Ocean from England, the Founding 
Fathers, as an act of thankfullness to God’s guidance, called the United States the 
«God’s Country». On the other hand, serious scholars would call them the «unfinished 
country» and quite a few political scientists would talk about «our more perfect 
Union», touching on the variety and contradictions of the Two-centuries and a half 
old «nation of nations». 
Keywords: God’s country; loose canons; racial tensions; nation; givenness.
I submit that the United States still retain some basic values, connected with their 
origin but in a more complicated sense. History does not have a «libretto»; it does not 
follow a preconceived line of development and seems to be inclined to surprise us 
with sudden, unforeseen turns. Progress, on the other hand, in spite of all the more or 
less inspired or prophetic predictions, is far from being a chronological fatality.
By the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth century, 
during the period that everybody would unwisely call the «belle époque», Europe was 
about to commit suicide following two world wars, not to mention the nazi Lager and 
the Stalin’s gulag.
It is perhaps in this connection that a modicum of gratitude is due to Donald J. 
Trump. The man, coming from real estate business to a major political role, has been 
instrumental in bringing into politics a business, like behavioural pattern completely 
alien to traditional American politics. One should not forget that Trump is the author 
of The Art of the Deal, a far cry from the Aristotle’s idea of «prudence» as the most 
important virtue of the policy-maker and even more distant from the jeffersonian 
prerogatives of the Founding Fathers. However, I do not feel that the election of Joe 
Biden is a pure and simple «return to decency», as The New York Times (6 December 2020) 
would have it. According to Roger Cohen,
«President Trump is not yet gone, but he’s muted, marginalized and moribund. American 
democracy was challenged by Mr. Trump at its very heart – respect for truth – and 
resisted. Joe Biden will take office in January as the 46th president of the United States. 
Decency will return to the White House, a fundamental moral shift. Dictators the world 
over will no longer have carte blanche to do their worst unchallenged. 
 10     AcAdemicus - internAtionAl scientific JournAl www.AcAdemicus.edu.Al     10
Mr. Biden, with 306 Electoral College votes – the same number that Mr. Trump won 
in 2016 when he called his victory a «massive landslide» - won with a little room to 
spare. All the protest and bluster from Mr. Trump cannot undo the facts. The obscenity 
of the president’s refusal to concede feels less stark in a nation inured to outrage. 
Still, it demonstrates the extent of Mr. Trump’s attempt to subvert the institutions and 
traditions of democracy. 
An American authoritarian lurch posed a real danger. Europe already felt isolated in its 
defence of the rule of law and human rights. That insidious, wheedling, plaintive voice 
from the Oval Office, oozing self-obsession, got inside everyone’s heads. Mr Trump’s 
political genius lay in his feel for the dark side of human nature and his ferocious, social 
media-propelled energy in appealing to it. The volume has dropped as the nightmare 
recedes. Suddenly there is mental space to think again». 
Roger Cohen seems to ignore that the Donald Trump phenomenon, despite some 
of its incredible aspects, is nothing new in American politics. An American historian, 
Daniel J. Boorstin, in his book, The Genius of American Politics, maintains and tries 
intelligently to prove that America does not have and does not need an «ideology». 
It was born out of some sort of a «miracle», well expressed in Thomas Jefferson’s 
«preamble» to the American Constitution, a sense of givenness, including all the basic 
democratic values that cover all the possible historical evolution. For this reason, 
Boorstin thinks that «American politics is not for export». In this respect, president 
Trump and his strange, surprising incoherence imply a significant break of the American 
political and cultural tradition, but they will be easily absorbed, as it were, within what 
could be called the «American exceptionalism».
By the beginning of the twenty-first century, the United States remains what it used 
to be when the Founding Fathers were finally able to land in New England: «God’s 
Country». I do not share in this connection the blasphemous bon mot that, if God 
did exist, he would certainly apply for American citizenship or at last for a green 
card. What I mean to say is that the collapse of the Soviet Union and the decline 
of ideological absolutism were more sud den and sweeping than most observers 
anticipated. In less than a couple of years the «Evil Empire», as President Ronald 
Reagan, in a controversial biblical rhetoric would term it, has sim ply disappeared 
from the map of the world. When I asked Mr. Mikhail Gorbachev, on the occasion 
of a UNESCO seminar in Venice, how he did it, his answer was disarmingly candid: 
«It was not difficult. It was inevitable».
It is my contention that the United States is still «God’s Country», but in a more 
profane sense: that is to say, from a strictly social and political point of view. It 
provides a unique economic, social, and cultural laboratory. It is a dynamic force 
in constant change even while remaining at the same time basically faithful to 
the fundamental principles embodied and expressed in the Constitution as the 
 f. ferrArotti - Are the united stAtes still the «God’s country»?     11
transcendent Law of the Land. This does not mean that other countries of the world, 
in Europe as well as in Asia, in the Middle and Far East and in Latin America, should 
look at the United States as a normative standard or criterion on the basis of which 
to measure their domestic progress or their regression from democratic practice. 
It is a fact, however, that the United States seems to precede and to pave the way, if 
not to indicate the road, for those countries that have decided to enter the difficult, 
and at times tortuous and painful, process of modernization and industrialization 
on a large scale.
There is a widespread feeling, especially among Europeans, concerning the US: 
at least since the end of the Second World War, and even more clearly since the 
collapse of the Soviet Union, the United States has attained a leadership position 
in the world, but it is a reluctant world leader for various intrinsic reasons. First of 
all, because it has no sense of history; secondly, because it cannot communicate 
effectively with other cultures and other countries due to the fact that it tends 
to project only itself and has a serious difficulty in understanding, as in were, the 
«otherness» of others; thirdly, because, whenever confronted with is sues that 
cannot be resolved through organizational measures or technical know-how, the 
US seems to helpless and to suffer a loss of nerves. There is a bit of truth in these 
strictures. I do think, however, that what the other countries have to learn from the 
United States as it is today is precisely the ability to communicate and understand 
on a foot of equaliting a wide variety of cultural values and behavioral patterns. 
It is an undisputable fact that the United States is today the first «nation of 
na tions» in world history. As such, it is certainly unique. It is no longer a unified and 
more-or-less monolithic culture. It is the first truly multiethnic and multicultural 
society in a world in which we are all migrants, one that is characterized by huge 
mass movements among different countries and continents. In this respect, the 
twenty-first century is bound to be the true American century, and, although 
reluctantly, the United States would have to accept the uneasy role of world leader.
Obviously, there is a price to be paid this. The price does not only concern the 
fact that the United States shall be forced more and more to play the unpleasant 
role of world policeman. The Cold War is over, but any idea of an idyllic world 
would be quite unrealistic. The international situation is chaotic and, worse, is to 
a large extent unpredictable. Religious and ethnic conflicts, tribal bloodshed and 
upheavals headed by local irresponsible «war lords», huge population movements, 
and a demographic explosion which is supposed to double the world population by 
the year 2050 - these are the predica ments facing the world leader of tomorrow.
Moreover, two continental elusive forces must be dealt with peacefully but firmly at 
the same time: Russia and China.
 12     AcAdemicus - internAtionAl scientific JournAl www.AcAdemicus.edu.Al     12
And too, one has to consider the position of the allied nations that are today on the 
verge of uniting in a single formidable power bloc: the new United Europe. What will 
happen to NATO? Are the strategic interests of the United States and of the future 
United Europe going to be compatible, if not identical?
If one analyzes the inconsistencies, which could also be viewed as the result of a 
pragmatic approach of the present American administration in the field of foreign 
relations, a certain cautious is in order. The United States does not seem to be willing 
to fly too high.
Different as they are, it is true that Vietnam and Bosnia have been two severe lessons 
in moderation. Not even the only remaining world power can be all powerful. Some 
degree of prudence is necessary. No room should be allowed for a delirium of 
omnipotence. Not every war in every corner of the world can be stopped or controlled 
by the United States, although some conflicts might be resolved or reduced. We know 
in Western Europe, based on past expe rience, that the United States will do whatever 
is in his power to do.
However, there is a chance that some difficult problems will be posed by the 
rela tionship between the United States and the United Europe which is now 
laboriously, but hopefully, in the making. There are issues such as the attitude to ward 
Iraq and Cuba, that might cause a serious split, at least in the short run, between them. 
Other sensitive areas might concern international trade, the behavioural patterns 
of American multinational corporations, or the effects of glo balization on economic 
decisions affecting world trade.
In order to deal with these problems as the world’s leader, the Ameri can mind must 
undergo a profound change. The golden days of splendid isolationism are over. The 
age of innocence is finished. The «American Dream» needs some basic rethinking. 
A new version of it has to be elabo rated. The «Homo Americanus» needs to redefine 
his identity. 
The average American, that is the type we like to call «Homo Americanus», is a 
purely mental fiction. It does not exist in reality and it does not have any empirical 
correspondent. It is, however, useful as a heuristic device in the sense of Max Weber’s 
«ideal type». Historically, this type has come to the American shores from all over 
the world. Trying desperately to escape from religious or political persecution or 
both, set in motion strictly from hunger and famine, lack of opportunity, and chronic 
un employment, a human wave, as it were, has at first crossed the Atlantic Ocean from 
Europe in search of a better life, peace and freedom, moved and almost mesmerized 
by a powerful thrust toward acceptance, integration, dignity, and freedom, with an 
ability to face self-sacri fice which rarely visits the probing scholars who study the 
world in the quiet penumbra of their cabinets de travail.
 f. ferrArotti - Are the united stAtes still the «God’s country»?     13
When Martin Luther King said in a famous speech to the enormous crowd gathered 
and pressing against Capitol Hill in Washington, «I have a dream», he certainly was 
not addressing the Afro-Americans only. He was in fact talking to all the citizens of the 
American Commonwealth.
For the constitution of the American self, I submit that the «American Dream» is 
essential. This seems true today as it was at the very beginning upon the Founding 
Fathers and later, when the American colonies broke their ties with the English 
Crown. However, there is nothing dogmatic about the «Ameri can Dream». It is not a 
monolithic vision or a strictly unified goal. It changes in time in its successive stages. 
What seems a stable characteristic is its individualistic nature. It has to be earned as 
a personal reward.
Without any scientific pretense, a typology of the «American Dream» can be plausibly 
constructed. The first type carries an essentially religious connotation and for many 
years remains at the root of what used to be called the Protestant Establishment. 
I have elsewhere remarked that when the Pilgrim Fathers managed to touch the 
shore of the State of Massachusetts - which they called, and not by chance, «New 
England», to signify a rebirth in pure and renewed form away from the evil of the 
Old World - they per ceived their experience in miraculous terms. The new land gave 
them a prodigious sense of «givenness», a gift from God. The wide-open spaces, 
the magnificent sunsets, the incredibly rich snowfalls, and the dense, mysterious 
forests - that wild, rich, untamed American nature, so different from the manicured 
nature of Europe - all seemed to show them that this was, in fact, the country God had 
reserved for them.
Here there was nothing to invent. No value was unrevealed. Every thing had already 
been given, presented by grace, and everything must be accepted. The substance of 
the early American identity is essentially relig ious, in the most literal sense, biblical. 
This is hard to understand for Europeans whose political identity had to fight bitterly 
against churches and denominations in order to retain the autonomy of the State 
vis-à-vis the competing religious authorities. As the basic values were given and 
explicitly elaborated already, there was at that time, and still there is today, no need 
and no use for ideologies. Nothing could be farther or more alien to the European 
scene. Contrary to Europe, the United States (typically a country without a pre-history 
in which the empirical datum has been traditionally conceived as equated with 
the transcendental value in a country that is in fact considered a «promised land». 
As all the basic values are given and beyond discus sion, no wonder pragmatism and 
scientism are fundamental ingredients of American culture. From Charles Peirce to 
John Dewey, one is impressed by the fact that an idea is viewed as true if it works. 
Ideological partitions do not count and are actually considered a mere waste of time, 
a professorial exercize in idle curiosity. All the possible values are already there, 
 14     AcAdemicus - internAtionAl scientific JournAl www.AcAdemicus.edu.Al     14
embodied in the Constitution. The only factor that can differentiate so cial groups and 
classes lies on the way in which to put them into practice; it has to do with technical 
know-how, not with moral options. The basic trauma of American social and political 
life, the Civil War, was not fought along mu tually exclusive ideological lines. It concerned 
life-styles more than philosophical ideas. Even the American Revolution of 1776 had 
very little ideological or dogmatic content. To use a phrase of Edmund Burke, the English 
conservative political thinker, it had to do with a practical, prag matic question: «It was 
a matter of local grievance» (no taxation without representation), entirely opposed to 
the French Revolution posture aiming at a universal dogmatic ideal («liberté, égalité, 
fraternité»).
The early religious orientation of American identity has been pre served until today. 
It still has a certain amount of resonance, no matter how «corrupted» or downgraded 
for purely utilitarian reasons, as in the case of the «moral majority» movements and 
in other forms of emotional populism.
No doubt the American Revolutionary motto: «no taxation without representation» 
would sound too prosaic to refined European ears. But those European intellectuals 
who are considering Americans as the true, only «primitives» of the modern 
world (see J. Baudrillard as an example) should perhaps realize that, given the present day 
hegemonic position of the United States on a world scale, the consequences of 
such alleged «primitivity» will weigh on the whole of humanity for the foreseeable 
future. 
Perhaps against these so-called primitives, who are actually technically very 
advanced, there is nothing, or very little, that can be accomplished by French 
grandeur and Eurocentric prejudice.
The evolution from the biblical spirit, with its strong community-based conformity (see 
Nathaniel Hawthorne, The Scarlet Letter) to the independent individual, extremely jealous of his 
free dom of judgement and of his ability to take care of himself as regards his means of 
subsistence, marks the transition to a second type of American self-identity: the free, 
self-sufficient, and self-cen tred individual. We are lucky in this respect because for 
the description of this type we have an admirable example, Henry David Thoreau. He 
represents, together with the religious-biblical component, an important characteristic 
of the American self-identity: a kind of rugged, almost tough, certainly proud, 
self-reliance that tends to use con sumer goods but stubbornly refuses to be used by 
them. In this respect, Thoreau has perhaps been misunderstood. His stand is not so 
much inimical to the machine. He rather seems afraid that in the end the machine will 
take over and become an end in itself, and that a new kind of slavery will take place: 
from master and inventor, man will become the servant of the machine. While he 
seems to go against the American grain, Thoreau is, on the contrary, quite pragmatic. 
 f. ferrArotti - Are the united stAtes still the «God’s country»?     15
In his self-imposed solitude, he wants to prove to himself his self-sufficiency in a true 
pioneer spirit. He does not need to go West and grow up with the country. His small 
pond and his log cabin in Concord are quite sufficient. His attack on the basic services 
of any civilized society certainly sounds radical and definitive, but there is noth ing 
theoretical or ideological about it. It is pure non-abstract pragmatism and belongs to 
the original American culture.
Thoreau represents the inner-directed personality that does not need indications 
from the outside. He is not against necessary consumption. He denounces only 
«conspicuous waste», to use Thorstein Veblen’s phrase. His ideal is to be able to live 
frugally and in this way to earn his independence and leisure. At times, in his book 
Walden, he anticipates the damage done today by work alcoholism. «I went to the 
woods - he writes - because I wanted to live deliberately, to confront only the es sential 
facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to 
die, discover that I had not lived. I did not wish to live what was not life, living is so dear; 
nor did I wish to practice resigna tion, unless it was quite necessary». This is revealing 
passage. The past last line marks a total departure from what might be seen as a purely 
passive acceptance of what the natural environment has to offer. Thoreau’s refusal 
of resignation to circumstances is quite American. Moreover, with a tone which we 
find almost literally identical in Jean- Jacques Rousseau’s Confessions, Thoreau seems 
obsessed with the idea that most people come to die without having ever been really 
alive. I do not think his stand is against mechanization on a large scale. His vitriolic 
attack is rather against consumerism. Not machines per se, but the attitude that forces 
one to lose self-consciousness by relying too much on objects that make you sleepy, 
is evil. In my opinion, the interpretation offered by Ralph Waldo Emerson is in this 
respect inadequate. While admiring the fact that Thoreau «chose to be rich by making 
his wants few», Emerson (in Selected Essays, London, 1982, pp. 393-415) detects in his nature 
«somewhat mili tary, not to be subdued, always manly and able, but rarely tender, as 
if he did not feel himself except in opposition». Emerson sees these qualities more in 
keeping with an anarchist bent than with the American char acter. I tend to disagree 
with Emerson, at least in this respect. There is a definite amount of toughness in the 
American character, in New England as well as in the Far West.
After the Civil War, with the defeat of the South and the inevitable decline of its 
genteel life-style, industrialism was bound to flourish and a relatively new type of 
American identity slowly emerged. «Carpet baggers», and «robber barons» would 
enter the scene. It was the beginning of the acquisitive society that actually was 
not and is not today in opposition to the early biblical-religious com ponent of the 
American identity, nor with the frugal and fiercely independent citizens of the small 
towns. Wealth acquired by hard work and shrewd busi ness practice was and still is 
regarded as evidence of a clear evidence of future salvation.
 16     AcAdemicus - internAtionAl scientific JournAl www.AcAdemicus.edu.Al     16
In the best Calvinistic tradition, a good standing in the community is for the true believer 
the assurance of certitudo salutis. The specific religious elements of American identity 
tend to be blurred. They remain implicit in the American psychological structure as an 
important cultural trait, but more than the promised land the United States today 
can better described at this point with the formula put forward by Talcott Parsons’s: 
«instrumental activism». Community spirit in its pure form seems to be on the way 
out.
The transition that takes place in modern times, especially after the two world 
wars, amounts to a profound transformation of the American character and involve 
both self-identity and collective identity. Not only the inner-directed persons are 
now outnumbered by other-directed persons or by what Theodor Adorno and his 
collaborators decided to define as «the authoritarian, that is gregarious, personality». 
But the very dichotomy between community and society, as expounded one hundred 
years ago by Ferdinand Toennies, seems to lose its grip. Contractualism seems to have 
the upper hand. America becomes more and more a legalistic minded country. Most 
members of Congress are lawyers by training. Every time an American feels in trouble, 
the first thing he thinks of is: «Let me call my lawyer». Every body seems to be suing 
everybody else. Political language and propaganda might help to understand the 
prevailing social mood. A political platform that has led recently the Republicans to an 
astounding victory in the House of Rep resentatives is called emphatically «Contract 
with America» and has been put together by the present House Speaker, Newt 
Gingrich. It was written in a brisk style like a legal memo and has ten parts, like the Bill 
of Rights and Moses’s Ten Commandments.
According to classical political philosophy, politics is the art of what is possible and the 
greatest virtue of the policymaker is prudence. In the «Con tract with America», there 
is on the contrary a hybris, a sweeping tone that smacks of business efficiency rather 
than of political wisdom. Under the Contract, the Republican majority committed 
itself to enact crucial leg islation within one-hundred days, from the balanced-budget 
amendment, the measures expanding prison construction and increasing sen tences 
to tax breaks for Social Security recipients and definite term limits for Representatives 
and Senators. Some of these measures are in themselves important and correspond to 
wide spread feelings of the American popula tion at large. «Taking back metropolitan 
streets» by freeing them from micro-criminality is something every American strongly 
desires for himself and his family. Among the measures advocated in the «Contract 
with America» there is also a provision en titled the «American Dream Restoration 
Act». Wonderful! But this restoration, which is badly needed, is conceived only in 
terms of a different form of tax-sheltered retirement account. Perhaps necessary, 
certainly not sufficient.
 f. ferrArotti - Are the united stAtes still the «God’s country»?     17
To restore the «American Dream» it takes much more than a few fiscal petty 
innovations. An excessively legalistic civilization and way of life must be brought back, 
little by little, to a community feeling, to what Robert Bellah called the forgotten 
«habits of the heart». A cold-blooded look at American society as it is today is, in this 
respect, necessary. Let’s forget about Constitutional promises and self-congratulatory 
rhetoric. Under present so cial conditions, the pursuit of happiness is on the verge 
of becoming a desperate pursuit of loneliness. Morality tends to become morale. 
Personal, genuine human relations tend to be replaced by business-oriented «public 
relations». American society is undergoing a process of polarization that could spell 
disaster in the near future. There are today two major factors troubling American 
collective identity and self-perception: on the domestic scene, the decline of that 
backbone of democracy, as the middle class used to be thought of and the emergence 
of relatively new ethnic mi norities that so far were regarded as irrelevant; from the 
international point of view, the growing uncertainty of a clearly defined national 
purpose, an uncertainty which has been paradoxically, made worse by the sudden 
disappearance of the Soviet Union. Perhaps, it is true for America today what has been 
true for huge empires throughout history: a great victory is a great danger. When ever 
I hear somebody praising uncritically the American Empire for the next millennium, I 
cannot help but thinking of the tears of Scipio crying over the destruc tion of Carthage 
ordered to the Roman legions by himself because he could anticipate, by looking at 
the end of this proud city the future collapse of his own city of Rome.
American collective identity needs to bring itself up to date in order to face the 
challenge posed by the new situation, both domestic and inter national. This amounts 
to an assumption of new responsibilities. In the first place, it seems necessary to 
recapture a degree of community spirit. The WASP syndrome belongs to the past. 
The price paid by Afro-American citizens, especially during the Second World War in 
terms of human lives and personal sacrifices, has put the racial question in the United 
States under a new light. The hypocritical formula «equal but separate» is no longer 
viable. The «global village» idea is still the misconceived approach in technical terms 
to a problem which is social and political in essence. The «melting pot» is a piece 
of wishful thinking which is today re placed by the «salad bowl»: each ethnic group, 
far from being ashamed of its origin and trying to forget it through the imitation of 
Anglo-Saxon mo res, is becoming more and more conscious and proud of its roots and 
of the value of ethnicity. As I have noted above, the United States is today a splendid, 
historically unique country in which different ethnic, religious, linguistic, and cultural 
groups are living together within the framework of a dynamic Constitution and under 
the rule of democratic law.
Living physically together, however, does not mean yet to have implemented a 
real com munity. America has become an achieving society, but achievement is still 
considered a lonely, individual conquest. Making it, or «roughing it», as Mark Twain 
 18     AcAdemicus - internAtionAl scientific JournAl www.AcAdemicus.edu.Al     18
would say, is still a purely individual goal in a society in which everybody fends for 
himself while God is supposed to keep an eye on all, a society that at times resembles 
closely a Dar winian jungle. To transform such a society into a democratic, articulated 
community – a community certainly not monolithic nor homogeneous but rather 
similar to a multifaceted mosaic – is the major challenge facing American leaders at 
the end of the Twentieth Century. In this respect, the sweeping tone of the «Contract 
with America» does not seem to help. It is likely to deepen the cultural cleavages 
and economic contrasts among the different groups. However, more than in the past, 
political leaders seem to be lis tening today to the new voices coming from inside 
America. Left and Right have perhaps lost their power of connotation. They read like 
labels without much meaning. The basic source of discontent is not only traditional 
economic scarcity or fear to lose social status together with one’s job. It concerns big 
government, overregulation, the excessive influence of the «politically correct», and 
other apparently non-economic issues. More than just being liberal or conservative, 
the present day American wants again to be his own master, and in this connection it is 
difficult not to recall Thoreau, but at the same time he becomes increasingly conscious 
that the problem of the individual in society today is not an individual issue.
The reelection of Bill Clinton in November 1996 proves that the doc trinaire approach 
of the radical Republicans does not pay. Since 1944 with Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s, 
no Democratic president had been reelected. Bill Clinton is undoubtedly a great 
political opportunist. He smells the mood of the time. He can grasp it. He has 
understood the new face of America. The WASP model has gone. The melting pot was 
an extemporaneous theory by sociologists and anthropologists eager to make peace 
with the Establishment but unaware of its warning. The balance of power has shifted 
from the East coast to the West coast, from New England to California and the South. 
The steel belt has since years become the rustbelt. Traditional conceptual categories 
can no longer describe nor interpret a society that has become an «archipelago» of 
cultures. This «archipelago» seems to have found in Bill Clinton his clever, pragmatic 
navigator. Is Clinton some kind of Gladstone resurrected? It is too soon to tell. He does 
not have charisma. But who wants it? As compensation, he can change his mind if it 
is required by a new unpredicted situation. He is flexible. By the end of his first term 
in office, Clinton was able to accomplish something that some day, in retrospect, will 
appear as a political masterpiece. In a radi cally different situation, with the economy 
booming and therefore without the benefit of a serious economic depression that has 
always been helpful to Democrats, Clinton has put together a social bloc which recalls 
Roosevelt’s New Deal: with the same opportunism of that great patrician presi dent, 
with his apparent nonchalance, giving up, whenever expedient, the grand plan for a 
national Welfare so dear to his wife, and eventually asking her to take a step back, if 
not to go on a world lecture tour, as it had happened to Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt. Some 
astute political commentators have asked themselves: what if Nixon had no shame? 
 f. ferrArotti - Are the united stAtes still the «God’s country»?     19
Meaning: what would have happened if Nixon had been able to be, like Clinton, 
shameless and somewhat careless or flippant about his lack of Protestant virtues?
I submit that these are rhetorical questions without much import. Politics is action, not 
comment. It has to do with decision, not with an idle evaluation of mere intentions. 
For Clinton, politics seems to be the art of navigating without a radar in a mostly 
unknown ocean, taking stock of the fact that a country as vast as a continent has 
changed skin at the threshold of a third millennium for which nobody seems to have a 
crystal ball. Today America is a fascinating reality because it hardly fits any traditional 
picture. Europe, when it comes to the problems of extra-communitarian immigrants, 
has much to learn from America. Here ethnicity, far from being a problem, has come 
to be viewed as a value. It is asserted as a basis for personal and group identity and 
is linked with the reevaluation of one’s roots. Since the publication of An American 
Dilemma by Gunnar Myrdal much mileage has been covered. «Separate but equal» 
had been the principle through which segregation was perpetuated for a century 
despite the Fourteenth Amendment. This «principle» has been exposed and overcome. 
American Anglo-Protestant groups expected immigrants to «melt». Today ethnicity 
has reemerged as a central aspect of personal identity and a common focal point of 
community life. It must be recognized that many sociologists, not only in the United 
States, have studied racial and cultural differences from a strictly ethnocentric point 
of view. Their attitude can easily be summed up in Henry Kissinger’s phrase when he 
admitted one day he did not know, and moreover he cared nothing, about the world 
south of the Pyrenees. Fortunately, the cultural mood is rapidly changing.
Americans are fast learning how to live with a problem. Not every difficulty can be 
solved instantly. You may have to wait a while: maybe a week, maybe a century.
Years ago, Max Lerner published a big volume, with a somewhat self-deprecating title, 
about America. The title read: The Unfinished Country. I think it is a great title, and a 
great compliment, and an important recognition of the American genius for constant 
change, for an ongoing pragmatic revolution. History goes on. Perfection means 
paralysis. 
At the individual level, Europeans can learn today from the United States how to 
manage the maze of overlapping loyalties in a single person and how to negotiate, as 
it were, a multiple ego in the age of «virtual reality». There is no guarantee of success 
but at least it is worth trying.
At the social level, European countries will perhaps be able to learn something from the 
American ability to have, instead of rigidly exclusive cultural norms, «loose canons», 
to use the phrase of Henry Louis Gates, that is cultural co-traditions, at the cost of a 
degree of confusion.
In this sense, the «unfinished country» is still «God’s country».
 20     AcAdemicus - internAtionAl scientific JournAl www.AcAdemicus.edu.Al     20
Bibliography
1. D. Bell, The End of Ideology, Chicago, Free Press, 1962.  
2. D. J. Boorstin, The Genius of American Politics, Chicago, University of Chicago 
Press, 1952  
3. E. Burke, (1978). Reflections on the Revolution in France, London, 1790. 
4. G. Campioni, Der Französische Nietzsche, Berlin, de Gruyter, 2009  
5.  B. Croce, Teoria e storia della storiografia, Milano, Adelphi, 1990  
6. F. Ferrarotti, Storia e storie di vita, Roma-Bari, Laterza, 1981  
7. F. Ferrarotti, Vite di baraccati, Napoli, Liguori, 1985  
8. F. Ferrarotti, Vite di periferia, Milano, Mondadori, 1993  
9. F. Ferrarotti, On the Science of Uncertainty, London-New York, Lexington Books, 
2003  
10. F. Ferrarotti. Bismarck’s Orphan: The Modern World and Its Destiny, from 
“Disenchantment” to the “Steel Cage” Academicus International Scientific 
Journal 2.04 (2011): 11-34.
11. F. Ferrarotti, Social Theory for Old and New Modernities, London-New York, 
Lexington Books, 2012  
12. F. Ferrarotti, La saggezza opportunistica del politico avveduto – Il caso Clinton, 
Chieti, Solfanelli, 2020  
13. F. Ferrarotti, Conoscenza intuitiva comune, scientifica, partecipata, Chieti, 
Solfanelli 2020  
14. S. Giametta, Nietzsche – il pensiero come dinamite, Milano, Rizzoli, 2007  
15. M. Lerner, The Unfinished Country, Chicago, Simon and Schuster, 1959  
16. G. Penzo, Nietzsche e il nazismo, Milano, Rusconi, 1987  
17. R. Pfeffer, Nietzsche: Disciple of Dionysus, Lewisburg, Bucknell University Press, 
1974.  
