M m ericanB Tntered secod lass ma7ltmatte N E!OL. XVII. No. 23. Nt as secOnd cl mi Mar. NEW YORK, MARCH 15, 1919 TEN PAGES SINGLE COPIES, 10 CENTS N. Y. P. 0. under Act of March 3, 1879. JULIAN STORY'S WILL gBy the will of Julian Story his' wife is oe heir and executor of his estate, which iludes paintings and art treasures. Most o the-latter were collected in Europe and e in his vilra near Florence, Italy. The hief value of these works lies in Mr. .tbry's associations with the artists who roduced them. The artist's estate will' probably not be 'y large, it is said, as much of what he jde was used for his art collection. The estate includes his Paris house and his villa t Florence. EDITH RANGER ACQITTED Miss Edith Ranger, sister of Henry W. nger, and two co-defendants, Carl W. yer and Richard H. G. Cunningham, both wyers, were cleared this week of the arges of -conspiracy in connection with e probate of a carbon copy of a supposed 11 of the artist which bequeathed his state of $300,000 to Miss Ranger. The trial, which -lasted more than two eeks, ended when the jury in the criminal ranch of the Supreme Court returned a erdict of not guilty after being out eight iours. The principal witness for the prosecution as Charles N. Wexler, a disbarred Stam 'rd, Conn., lawyer, who testified to having rawn up the fake will, saying that he did so at the instigation of the defendants. --The defence produced witnesses who ;wore the dead artist had made a will sub iequent to the 'one dated Jan. 21, 1914, hich\left the estate to the Academy of 7Design) - This later will, the defence con tended, disappeared,'and it was the carbon copy of the will which the defendants at tempted to have filed for probate. O'CONNOR'S LAFAYETTE fr"Andrew O'Connor," says the Boston Transcript, "is making an equestrian atue of Lafayette to be erected in Balti ore .'-The-sketclf for *the statue is irSh-is udio at Paxton, Mass. It represents afayette as a -very young man, almost oyish in appearance. In fact, he was still his teems when he entered Philadephia WthWashingtonin 1780, at the head of the WAerican troops. ".'Other statues have - shown Gentral Lafayette, of the Continental Army, after he had wotf an international reputation for 4i' valiant' deeds,' said Mr. O'Connor re tently. 'But mineit to be more particularly aionument to the boyish enthusiasm, up ghtness and honesty of the young hero. 'know that my statue will surprise many persons, and I am glad to state my reasons Fir showing Lafayette at this time of his ife. When he came to this country he ..a young, noble, high-spirited boy. e was only. 18 when he first asked his overnment to allow him to come over t--help the colonists,' and his government at that time refused, wishing, as a neutral. ,o_keep out of the wars of others countries-' -."The statue shows the young Lafayette n horseback, as he was when he entered hila. in 1780. He is shown on a fine, spirited horse, of a strength which serves s.to enhance the delicate yet sure power of e'boyish figure, who rides with the noble arriage of the aristocrat." tCHINESE CARVINGS- AT MUSEUM ' The American Museum of Natural His ory has recently acquired, the gift of Messrs b4Albert G. and-Jerome J. Hanauer of N. Y. C!~ ity, some beautiful examples of carvea migalmatolite or false jade. This material Xa~hs some of the properties of certain vari s4fe of soapstone. It is used throughout +,i Chna for carved objects in much the same ttray as jade. Owing to its softness, how tever, it can bre manipulated with far greater ~ase than the harder and more valuable 'gia'de. This permits a certain freedom of ' t<reatment in the false jade carvings whichl ->'bear about the same relation to jade carv >'if';igS that wood carvings do to sculp'ture in fn^arble. The figures now on exhibition in i- ,the Morgan Hall of Gems at the American LMuseum are admirable instances of this teease of expression. as well as of the skill v ~ith which the Chinese sculptors have em pl)oyed the different colors occurring in the *3@-aalmatolite to give contrast to their de ;,ns. *,'2'',' HOFFMAN BUST SOLD t%The Metropolitan Museum has acquired a bsronze bust by Miss Malvina Hoffman rep ,fresentlng the heroic head of a young war 'iror in a knitted helmet, entitled "A Modern x~jrisader." HONORS TO FRENCH ARTIST Jean Julien Lemordant, the Breton painter who lost his eyesight in battle in the early days of the war, is an honored guest at Yale. He will speak three times oni subjects connected with French art in New Haveni and will exhibit some 300 of his pictures. The artist's immediate purpose in coming to America was to accept in person the second award of the Howland Memorial prize, the first award having been made posthumously in 1916 to the late Rupert Brooke. The prize was established in memory of the late Henry E. Howland, '54, for award to "a citizen of any country in -recognition of some achievement of marked distinction in the field of literature, fine arts, or the science of government," the idealistic element in the recipient's work being an important factor in his selection. The award was made Tues. eve. last, in the Yale School of Fine Arts, when the artist spoke on "France and the War." A COLLECTOR OF BIBLES For 25 years Bishop William A. Quayle of the Methodist Episcopal Church has been a zealous collector. In that time he has not missed the break-up sale of a single library of note in which -there were Bibles. As a result he has a collection of rare copies of the Scriptures at his St. Louis residence. PEALE'S LONDON WASHINGTON Mr. Horace Wells Sellers writes to the N. Y. "Tribune' from Phila. as follows: "A recent issue of the 'Tribune' referring to the -portrait of Washington presented to President Wilson, while in London, states that 'it was painted by Beal, of Phila., and was one of three copies, the original of which hung in the Council Chamber at Phila. and was burned many years ago.' "In correction,- it may be of interest to know this portrait was the work of Charles Willson Peale, who painted numerous life portraits of Washington, and that the original of this full-length, painted from life, was not destroyed, but now hangs in the gallery of the Academy of the Fine Arts in this city. The unpublished corre spondence of the artist now in my pos session refers to this portrait. It may be of interest to add that the sash mentioned was worn not as an exceptionl in the case of the commander in chief, as intimated, but in pursuance of the army headquarters order of July 14, 1775, issued at Cambridge, Mass., by which the general officers in the army were distinguished as follows: "The commander in chief, a light blue ribbon worn across the breast betwen coat and waistcoat; major and brigadier general, by a pink ribbon worn in like manner, and aids de camp, by green ribbon. "Peale was called upon to paint a number of copies of this portrait for the several states and for presentation to foreign courts, and including also a copy ordered for the college at Princeton, now in Nassau Hall." HIGH ART PRICES IN LONDON Some of the Camperdown collection at Christie's, London, Feb. 21 last, just re ported, were as follows: Holbein's "Por trait of a Gentleman" and "Portrait of a Lady," $3,937.50; Gainsborough's "Portrait of Mr. Vestris," $1,522.50; J. B. Pater's "Fete Champetre," $14,175; Mme. Vigee le Brun's 'Portrait of the Counitess de Mauny," $1,522; J. F. De Troy's "A Read ing from Moliere," $26,250; Gainsborough's 'Portrait of Lady Blackstone," $7,350; W. Collins' "Red Riding Hood," $2,150; Van Goyen's "River Scene," $3,150; F. Guardi's "Island Near Venice," $9,185, and Sir Joshua Reynold's "The Piping Shep herd," $11,550. PEALE PORTRAIT BEQUEST Four portraits by Charles Willson Peale, valued at $10,000, have just been presented to the Site and Relic Society of German town, Pa., and will be hung in the museum of the organization in Vernon Park. The gift is made in accordance with the will of Miss Grace Patterson Turnbull, who died Nov. 11, 1917. - The four portraits are life size and have been restored. Art---"experts" state that they are worth $2,500 each and they will be insured for $10,000. The portraits are those of ancestors of Miss Turnbull. WHISTLER ETCHINGS' BUYER The buyer of the Howard Mansfield col lection of Whistler's etchings and litho graphs is "Harris Whittemore," (not Wid demare) of Naugatuck, Conn. ART STUDENT WINS PRIZE Miss Lois Lenski, an alumna of the Studio Club of the Young Women's Christian Association at 35 E. 62 St., has been awarded a prize of $25, offered by Mrs. Stephen Baker, chairman of the com mittee of management, for the best cover design for "Art Life," a monthly magazine edited by, the club members. The judges were Jonas Lie, Thomas W. Fogarty and William F. Payson. SCHOOL MAKES POTTERY The discontinuance of the war and a gen erous legacy left to the Pa. Museum and School of Industrial Art, Phila., now enables that institution to continue a plan for the manufacture of what is known as Pa. Dutch pottery. The legacy was left as a memorial to Dr. Edwin A. Barber, former curator of the museum. The "World" Magazine, as a result of a cover design competition instituted by it, has begun the publication of a series of cover designs based upon original modern dress designs as evolved from Greek statuettes. Miss Phoebe Jenks Wilhoit, winner of the first prize in this series, is a student at the Cooper Union Art School. PHILA. ART SEQUESTERED An inquiry tllat appeared in the AMERICAN ART NEWS of January 25 in reference to cer tain pictures by Phila. artists never, or at least very rarely, seen and yet which would add to and sustain the reputation of the city as a ceniter in the movement of contem porary American art, has stimulated con siderable interest in the work of discovery of some of the remarkable canv.iies which disappeared from th'e view -nd enijoy ment of the public. J. McClure Hamilton, the well known portrait painter and pres't of the Pa. Academy Fellowship, has been moved to action in the matter, and reports to your correspondent that he has located, after some research, one important work, Eakins' "Gross Clihic," a work that would honor any community to possess, in a third floor classroom of the Jefferson Medical College, seen by no one e-- -- in terested only in surgery, a. haps, one-tenth are capable o it as a work of art.- This is of 'the incredible neglect to the things that really ct.. T pality that aspires to be kn .~ patron of the liberal arts. Phila. his an art jury that has not as yet shown to any great ex tent its "raison d'etre," butt the question naturally arises whether it hght ossibly be within its power to use s, nce in finding places, permanent or t ry, in public art galleries, where so the sub merged art work might be en, and where it would inspire the numerous art students that come here from all sections of the Union, and at the same time aid in a gen eral scheme of educating others not en gaged in producing pictures, and in that *way raise also the general level of culture, There was a report by Mr. Harpilton upon the subject of the "Gross Clinic" in the bulletin of the Metropolitan Museum is sued just previous to the Eakiins Memorial Exhibition there. It is well known- that many canvases of merit have reposed for years in the ob scurity of the cellars of the Pa. Academy, apparently for want- of wall space for ex hibition, but from the current gossip of the studios that only one member of the board of directors cares particularly for contem porary American art, although most gen erously assisting in a financial way to the success of the best American exhibitons in the country, there may be another reason why we never see certain works tha-t note - the continuity of the history of American art. This, of course, does not imply that there is any lack of appreciation on the part of the public, of the opportunity to study' the works by foreign artists in the private collections that have from time to time been seen on the walls of the academy. British XVIII century art alone, as exemplified in the McFadden group exhibited there not long ago, was worth going miles to see. "Con sistency, thou are a jewel," yet why is it that after no effort is spared to assemble them, year after year within the walls of the oldest institution of the arts in the United States, one seldom has occasion to record acquisi tions of the works of our native artists by the gentlemen of the board of directors who have contributed so liberally otherwise to the maintenance of the academy's annuals? Bearing upon the subject of constructive plans for this improvement of art conditions generally as they exist, locallv there was a discussion at a meeting of the Academy Fellowshio on1 Feb 4 in which Robert Vonnloh,, Frederick .W0augh and Birge Har rison took part. NATIONAL ART CLUB DOINGS At the recent opening of the "W7ar Hous ing" exhibition at the National -Arts Club, nteresting addresses were made 'by Mr. Robert D. Kohn. chief of production of the Emergency Fleet Corporation; Mr. T'red erick C. Ackerman, Mr. Richard S. Chil ds, secretary of the committee on new indus trial towns, and the chairman of the even ing. Mr. D. Everett Waid. Lantern slides were shown. The "open table" for men had as guest of honor Monday eve, last in the grill Capt. Allan Bott, M. C., author of "Cavalry of the Clouds." Attached as an aviator to Gen. Allenby's expedition, he was captured by the Turks at Nazareth and escaped by the way of Constantinople and Russia, and on the collapse of Bulgaria joined the British forces there, and then rejoined Gen. Allen by at Damascus. He thrillingly described Bolshevik activities of which he was a wvit ness. Mr. Rufus Steele presided, and his subiect "Flying for Allenby in Palestine." The women's "open table" held a din ner at the club Tuesday eve, last, when most of the guests of honor were drawn Ifrom the dramatic profession. "DEO GRATIAS" Horatio Walker In Walker Exhibition Montross Gallery-See page 3. -- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~jl -2 - AMERICAN ART -NEWSE--S .2~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~. I I'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ Spanish Art Gallery LIONEL HARRIS, Proprietor OLD MASTERS Jinliqucs 50 Conduit Street LONDON, W. I ANTIQUITIES Ol.D FABRICS DAWSON 9 EAST 56th ST BET. 5th & MADISON AVES. TAPESTRIES DECORATIONS Picture, Studio and Gallery Lighting EXPER7 ADVICE 1. P. FRINK, Inc. 24th St. and 10th Ave., New York Telephone Biryant 6739 Established 1875 D. CALO & SONS Amercan and Foreign Painfings Artistic Picture Frames 107 West 46th Street New York 01be ome ofA"ld Masters Where you can find Rare Paintings from the 13th to the 20th Centuries WESTON GALLERIES 622 LEXINGTON AVE. NEW YORK cYI4ONIF| PERSIAN ANTIQUE GALLERY VIII to XII Century Rare Faience Fouille from Rhages and Sultanabad XIV to XVII Century Miniatures, etc. 539 MADISON AVENUE I_EXHIBITIONS NOW ON Second~ Annual Brooklyn Artists Show The BJrooklyn Society of Artists is hold ing its second annual exhibition at the Pouch Gallery, Clinton and Lafayette-Ayes. Brooklyn, through Mar. 23. The, catalog contains 140 numbers, and the display i~ superior to its predecessor of last year. Harry' Roseland is well represented bya rather large canvas, entitled "Hope Eter nal," which features a girl with fine spur mahogany hair among the sand dunes, he face in profile and silhouetted against cloudy sky. Frederick J. Boston's "Mist: Morning" is a well composed landscape Janes Weiland's "On the Beach" portray two summer girls Onl a beach. "Sunse Prayer," by Nicolas Macsoud, has Orienta charm, and "The Fisherman," by Rober F. Bloodgood, is a fine study of a wild duck, while "Space," by the same artist although a smaller picture, is perhaps bette in treatment. -Hamilton Easter Field, in his "Washing ton's Andirons," shows a painting of; mantle with andirons. "Old Homestead b Moonlight," by Clara Fairfield Perry, is well painted canvas. Eugene V. Brewste is represented by two canvases of whicl his "Roslyn Clam Wharf" is perhaps th better, and "A Studio Corner," by Thoma W. Shields, is a well painted interior. 27 RUE DE BERRI EA-ten ds a cordial invitation to yo 2 D to visit hiis Amiierican Branch tit FJRi7%ElCI . iZR TI of t1ze HYID.DLE AGES I 8 East 57th Street New Yorkl SCULPTURES TAPESTRIES Where he has on exhibition the FURNITURE finest Masterpicces, brought from1 P A I N T I N G S Paris owing to the war. RARE FABRICS Salmagundi Annual Oil Exhibition -The present annual exhibition of oils at the Salmagundi Club, which openied at the! Club's galleries, 47 Fifth Ave., to Mar. 8, to continue through Mar. 22, bears out its reputation as one of the most important and interesting displays of the season. The pictures are well arranged and harmoniously hung, and the walls present an attractive appearance. The large gallery at the end of the hall, well lit and with its sympathetic background, is naturally the choice place. It contains many of the best canvases N. Y. has seen this winter. Here is found Frank De Haven's "Roaring Brook," with its rich deep color and pleasing composition. In close proximity is Cullen Yates' virile and colorful "The Cove," broadly and sympa thetically painted. A near neighbor to this canvas is "Clear and Cold," a fine cattle piece by- Glenn Newell, -full of light and space, with ably grouped cattle in an attrac tive landscape. - For those who have grown to know and love Warren Davis' beautifully drawn and well painted nudes, his "Taffeta Frock," will be a surprise, but it proves the fact that he can paint maidens draped with quite as much interest as hia -dancing nymphs and bathers. The well modeled flesh tones of the face, the-grace and ease of the hands that li'e tranquilly in the lap, and the painter's quality that fills the work, mark it a fine composition Paul King has a soft toned, atractive beach scene, "Midsummer Afternoon," and Eliot Clarke's "Summer Idyl" has fresh greens and much of Nature's truth to recommend it. There is charm of sentiment in Granville Smith's "Still Night," and George Peace Ennes advances his repu tation with his "St. Croix Highlands," the water of which has depth of tone and the entire work a color charm. Carle Blenner well decerves the prominent place given his "Jewel Case" for it is onle of the best r--nvasies he has ever painted, with beauty of color and expression.. Orlando G. Wales reminds his friends of his growing reputa tion by sending -regularly to this show. His "Dorney Park, Pa." is decidedly credit able in technical qualities and sentimental charm. Guy Wiggins' "Snow Crowned Hills" captured the Isidor prize. It is one of his well painted snow pictures which have won 1'im an enviable reputation. Ivan Olinsky's "Young Mother" was awarded the Shaw Durchase Prize. It was a worthy choice, as in this richly toned, sincere and able composition, the artist has succeeded in "getting his message over" with unmistak able sympathy. Leon Kroll sends his familiar but always interesting "Sophronia," one of the best paintings of a negro woman ever shown here. There are good works 1v Carleton Wiggins, A. L. Groll, Ossip T.iiide, Robert Vonnoh, A. T. Schwartz. William Otis Swett, Gustave Wiegand, whose "Silver Woods," beautiful and tender in tone, is enveloped in the poetry that always marks his work, Joseph Boston dis plays "Miss Peggy," tonal and colorful with beauty and girlish charm to recom mend her Walter Friedlander, John Wen .er, Ernest Albert, Martin Borgord. Hen ning Ryden and George Lawrence Nelson , are also represented by excellent works. ; McDowell Club Show t The current McDowell Club show, on to I Mar. 23, includes paintings and sculpture t by Chester Beach, Carle J. Bleuner, 0. A. -Nordstrom Carlson, Jessie Savage Cole, :, H. Kownatzki, Charlotte Lund, Grace P. r Noxon, Harriett.S. Phillips. Elizabeth Cady Stanton, S. J. Vickers and Heppie WRicks.. [Owing to the continued failure of the x McDowell Club's art secretary, despite re Y peated requests and even complaints from a artist exhibitors, to notify, if necessary, by r telephone,, the ART NEWS in time for itc h wveekly calendar, or to send the catalog oS e tlae club displays in time for advance notiee s the ART NEWVS regrets that it cannot review~ this display-Ed.] Art at Palm Beach Except for some architecture on old Spaniish anid Moorish lines, Palm -Beach is not associated in the public minid with art, save that form of art in dress anid adorn ment practised by the fair butterflies who hiave beeni flittinig through the now waning winiter seasoni at the Florida resort. It is, therefore, surprising to learn that chiefly through the efforts and energy of Mr. Kingore, who secured the exhibits and superinitended their shipment to and fro, and of Miss Jane Peterson, who has been at Palm Beach for some weeks past, a most creditable art exhibitioni was recenitly or ganized on the houseboat "La Singerie," moored at the Beaux Arts dock oni the Lake Trail, which opened, with a tea and recep tion, Feb. 24, and continued for some days. The display was held for a local charity, the Colored Hospital, to raise a funid of $2,000 to take up a debt of $500 oni the in stitution, and to provide monley to draw onl wlhen the income from patienits is not suf ficienit for the runniilg expenses. There were a number of smart patron esses and the following artists were repre sented by typical examples of their work (for the most part, familiar to N. Y.--art lovers, but witlh some few new works, nota bly some Palm Beach- landscapes and scenes, painited by Miss Petersacny: Cecilia Beaux, George Bellows, Gerome Brush, Guy P. Du Bois, Blendon Campbell, Mary C. Canifield, Robert W. Chanler, Lil lian Cotton, Williamii Cottoni, Gaston La Chaise, Randall Davey, Jo Davidson, Hunt Diederich, Paul Dougherty, Margaret Downing, Robert Henri, Eugene Higgins, Leon Kroll, Max Kuehne, Paul Manship, Eleanor Mortimer, Dujan Penic, Andrew O'Connor, Jane Peterson, Jane Poupelet, John- S. Sargent, Edith Finley Thomas (Mrs. E. P. Thompson), Edith Blight Thompson, Olive Tilton and Mrs., Harry Pavne Whitney. The exhibitioni was most successful anid was largely attended. and it is understood the needed amount for whicli it, was held was doubled through the receipts from ad missions and profits on works sold. Wolfe Club Annual Exhibit at Grace House .The Catherine Lorillard Wolfe Art Club is holding its annual exhibition of work by members- of the club at Grace House, No. 802 Broadway, through March. The catalog contains 86 numbers, and the portrait prize was awarded to Lydia Floret for her "Girl Cleaning Brass." The girl in her working clothes and a dust cloth on her head, is simply but strongly painted. The expression is happy and the ligbt on the brass is well painted. Mrs. Alta West Salisbury captured the landscape prize with her "Beech Trees,' broadly painted grand old trees towering into a good sky. The colors are'well man aged throughout. "Autumn." by the same artist, is in fine, rich colors. It was awarde( honorable mention. Mrs. Elizabeth Tinker Elmore got the priz.e for her etching "Lion Cubs" carefullv studiec at the Bronx Zoo, and Miss Mungo Park was ziven the first prize for her sculptures en titled "Aeroplane on McDougal St." Sh4 also obtained honorable mention for her "Spring," done in bas-relief, a symbolizatiot of vouth, incidentally introducing lamb. gamboling blithely. Miss Park was also "mentioned," for he oil, "The Sweat Shop," in rich well modu lated colorings. Lizette Gregor-y Smith contributes a nice little snow scene in con color, entitled "Winter in Westchester.' Marthla Wheeler Baxter is represented by; colorful portrait of "Miss Helen Drew."; study in green. Caroline Van H. Bear contributes a clever picture entitled "Wait ing," in which pinks and reds dominate "Stony Brook" by Rosina Don Dero, is wel if simply executed. "Woodstock Evening, by Lydia Kundson. is painted with distinc tion. "Breaking Clouds." by Mrs. Nelli Ozanlne. is a well studied landscape. DURAND -RUE- L New York - 12 East 57th Street. Paris - - 16 Rue Laffitte Messrs. E. &X A. Much HIGH CLASS AMERICAN PAINTINGS 108 West 57th Strect Next to t7.e Lotus Club --Sangiorgi Gallery . ..........................,,,,,,,.... ..... ...1l...................................................... JVine lrto A (tfique% A L etorati'on New York Studio: 55 E. 56th St. ROME: BORGHESE PALACE MIe- XVIItj (Centurp Mallerp of Olb NfIazterb - bigb-CIa0m% Vainttinom; 23a 0lb Jlonb .treet, lonbon, Wl. 1. - ARTHUR GREATOREX i Fine Art Dealer - j Publisher of Modern Original Etchings . ,and Mezzotints. I 14 Grafton St., London, W_J The Art Collectors' -Association, Ltd. 101 Jo mnyn Street; London, W. I. - Have for disposal several fine collections of' Old Masters. Will send photographs and par ticulars on application. Will b oc mision ii a, King Soetoree,St.ames'soit, Lotdon Potrit by Alber Stret,Lodner. . tHae group ofsportsvra it ecletos by. Aler Stre weldrMastr.Wn ledphtgah and haeclrsiniially; thoughts out and carefu.Wlly appied As like-" fashionbe adsitaters among whormwere Mie. Eli rnc adril,Jh . GAndteLatER Jeni Du antRie, an Mesrsha J, Ja tre y Scifeinhere FreienghDuyscn, r.rs Tltom(is s Biglow E-l~ ish reprseteds ., st1andKing inreea blac velvet's gonndo grce ful Plrtacdinthe cava inbeatbecoming' i There is goodtasnytechdispaye inalthe ar-. ranement. o Mors.itb Albert Sternerisyma theugticaan arflly paintedand th likensise-' ceslent alothey re isi sentien finhult the potri 1faMssionalivi siterner amndgh whomwrk ha godclr Mr..Eli Lreo EVanerettis anotherfine iknverss, terehialyotSainedle, howeverla TiStt e n the oulity ofemstio DuathRie, works. s (Exthitbitiongs cotined otrctvnePag 6fhe I ~~~~~~~~~~AMERICAN ART NEWS1 Important Examples of OLD CHINESE PORCELAIN from GORER OF LONDON on Exhibition at Parish, Watson & Co., Inc. American Reiresentativee 560 FIFTH AVENUE NEW YORK Enfrance as hitherto through Drelcer d Co. Horatio Walker at Montross' 'Some 15 recently painted canvases by Horatio Walker, on exhibition at the Mont ross Gallery, 550 Fifth Ave., to March 29, will surprise even the most enthusiastic ad mirer of the artist, long ranked as among :the few most virile of living American land scape and 'animal painters, and who has deservedly won the title of "The American Millet," from his strong and appealing por trayals of 'rustic life and labor, for the most part made on the Isle d'Orleans in the St. Lawrence river, a few miles from Quebec, * Canada, where the painter has long made his home. The present display, as has been said, * will surprise the lovers of Walker's art because the wider range which his able . brush has taken of late evidences a versa tility of subject and technique, which, while .suspected, was not so clearly shown as now before. He hlas departed from hiis accus tomed---subjects in the simnple, pearly little "'Landscape After Rain," beautiful in light and color, the remarkable still life painting. .of a brace of "Wild Ducks," the "Morning on the Batture," a landscape which, in sil very tone-and pure fresh color, is worthy of Boudi.n, :in another almost .dainty, deli cate landscape, "Dewy Morning," but most A .,notably in the large, imaginative allegori cal composition, "Hippocrene," the myth of * Pegasus, a work of much power, beautiful color and cloud effect-a blue, silvery moon light filtering through fleecy clouds, as fine -as any Blakelock painted, with a group of -figures in dramatic attitudes in the fore ground, and Pegasus on his winged horse, riding off into the night sky above the tall, .gushing fountain, for whiclh the horse's -hoofs have opened the ground. Save in the large moving composition. "Deo Gratias,". reproduced on the front page -.of this issue, a wayside shrine at dusk . f.and which tells-cits owni appealing story of simple rustic faith . and devotion-the re nmaining -works in this strong and utnusual display are the artist's well known rural sub jects, but IIow, as a rule, painted in a lighter, _:-'higher key and more joyous in' atmosphere. Especially notable are the large "Golden Dew-Woman Milking," fine in color and action, the "Horses at the Trough." with its .grey- and blue color scheme, the delicate, decorative, almost fanciful, "Girl With Tur keys," and the "Pastoral-Sow and Pigs," as- good as any Morland ever painted, and -delicious in soft color. The watercolors re 'call Mauve at his- best in subject and treat --ment. While suggesting- in his larger and -dramatic compositions Gericault, in his ani mal and cattle pieces Mauve and Morland, :and in his sentiment and feeling, as also in his su'bjects, that great portrayer of the "Poetry of Toil," J. F. Millet-Horatio Wal ;icer, as emphasized in this remarkable ex Thbition-'still has an oribginality and indi -viduali.ty which ranks him high among liv inlg modern painters. Medallions in Wax at Ackermann's There is an interesting' display of medal lions in wax, by Ethel Frances Mundy, at the Ackermann Galleries,; 10 E. 46 St., to Mar. 18. Miss.Mundy's work in this medi -um is quite remarkable and has already gainled her an enviable reputation which the -present exhibition 'cannot fail to enhance. Delicacy, distinction and a fine color sense are the marked qualities of these artistic -medallions which form an attractive exhibit. p rnkK. M. Rehn | |1 AMERICAN PAINTINGS ; .6Wst 50th Street NEW YORK ANDERSON ART GALLERIES ..426 S. Michigan Ave.~ CHICAGO DmrCa PAINTINGS "Thirty Americans" at Macbeth's For its. annual exhibition on to April 1 next-a smaller Academy, it has been well termed, the Macbeth Gallery at 450 Fifth Ave. has this season assembled 30 oils by 30 modern American painters, "not," as is stated in the Foreword to the modest little catalog, "as a mere arbitrary numerical ar rangement of men axnd their work, and not necessarily the thirty "best" painters, as time alone can determine this-but what the gallery managers consider the thirty best painters, past and present, whose work has been chosen, not only because of individual excellence, but for their effect upon each other on a limited space of gallery wall. The gallery has assuredly succeeded in its purpose, for it would be difficult to im agine a more satisfactory assemblage of really good, nay superior, pictures than those it has now brought together. With the exception of the characteristic and alluring bust portrait by Whistler, the well-known "Daughter of the Conicierge," shown at the San Francisco Exposition, the rarely beautiful little "Moonlight Marine" of Albert P. Ryder, and the two examples of George Inniess, the fine example of his Med field period, "Golden Sunset," reproduced in the ART NEWS last week, and a large and somewhat panoramic distanlt view of "St Peter's-Rome," of the artist's Romiain period, the oils shown are all by living mnen and the gallery's modestly put claim that the collectionl fairly represenits the best that present day American-pairiters have to offer. is not an extreme one. It is impossible to do more in limited space than briefly note the more strikinig canvases shown, every one of which is char acteristic in! subject and technique of the painter. From Frank W. Benson, of Boston, comes one of his typical summer outdoors with a figure, this time of a ruddy-cheeked boy, "Little Boy Blue," the canvas aglow with sunlight and color and filled with air and the joy of life. Louis Betts sends the best example of his strong brush seeni for a long time past-a bust portrait of a laughinig little girl in a picturesque hat and winiter cape-done in rich browns and lifelike in expression, richer even in subdued color tlhaln usual with the artist; Emil Carlsen Tolentino Art Gallery Fine Antique Furniture Bronzes and Marbles. Interior Decorator Rome New York Via Sistina 57 749 Fifth Avenue shows perhaps his best still life, "Blue, White and Gold," and Charles H. Davis a most poetic landscape, "Quiet Light of Evening." The "Night Silences" of Eliott Dainger field is one of his best performlanices, rich in color quality and full of poetry, anid Joseph De Camp's "Red Kinmono" is one of those brilliant, solid, high-keyed, hot flesh-toned figure works, marked especially by the able handling of light through a large window on the seated figure-associated with his brush. The example of the poetic Dewey, 'Homeward," is thoroughly typical, as is also the "Interior" of Thomiias Dewing one of his best tonal color symphonies. Paul Dougherty's coast and miarin-e scene, 'Toward Evening," is in unusually high key and essentially joyous, and Ben Foster's 'Midsumnmer Moonrise" has all his charac teristic brushwork and tenderness of feel ng. From Robert Henri comes his bust portrayal of an "Ir.sh Girl" in brilliant reds and with virile execution, and Childe Has sam sends his "Calvary Church"-a winter snow scene in N. Y. . Gari Melchers shows his lovely interior, "The Open Fire," a por trait of his wife, and Willard Metcalf a "June Morning," trembling in light and air -and most appealing. The J. Francis Murphy is the finiest and strongest example of his brush yet seen, and is dated 1919-simple in motif but a dream of poetic color and feeling. The "No vember" of Chauncey F. Ryder is one of his best works, as is also Ivan Olinisky's figure work, while Gardner Symons' "The Quiet Hour," a comparatively small winter land scape, in clear, and fresh color and sunlight, is the most attractive example of his work yet seen. Edmund C. Tarbell is represent ed by his admirable and well-known interior with figures, "Mother, Mercie and Mary," Dwight W. Tryon by an "October Dav," and J. Alden Weir by his well-known "Girl with a Lute." The "New Jersey Landscape" of Ballard Williams is onie of his large, full and rich-colored examples full of quality. Louis Dessar, Richard E. Miller, Albert L. Groll and F. C. Frieseke are also well-sep r esented. - STUDIO FOUNDED ESTABLISHED IN NEW YORK - IN 1840 SINCE 1907 - ROUGERON 94 Park Avenue, between 39th and 40th Streets PICTURE RESTORATION Hiohest References from Museums, Collectors and Picture Dealers The Gorham Foundries give to the casting of life size, colossal, and small statuary that painstaking and sympa thetic handling which alone in sures the most successful result. El Particular attention is being given to the patining of statuettes. l The Gorham Galleries are a continual exposition of every thing new in contemporaneous sculptures. Correslondence Solkited THE GORHAM CO. FIFTH AVENUE and 36th STREET NEW YORK Louis Ritman. at Macbeth's Louis Ritman, a young American painter of only 29, who has studied for some years in France, and has painted at Giverny under Monet's influence, recently returned from Paris to take a studio in N. Y., and is show ing a score of his oils in the Lower Gal lery at Macbeth's, 450 Fifth Ave., through March 22. The display is an inspiring one to lovers of delicate, high-keyed, decorative painting, and while the young artist shows the strong ilnfluences which have also influenced his older fellows, Frieseke and Miller in his painting, he has even more individuality than these able painters and "attacks" his - canvas with a vigor and feeling that are re markable. He is a painter to be reckoned with, and his progress will be watched with interest by this journal. There is more form and substance than Frieseke obtains in Ritman's textures and accessories, and some of his still-life paint ing is beautiful, while-he has all of the older man's decorative and color sense.. His nudes are strikingly good,'notably his "Pre paring for a Swim" and "The Bather," which should make Miss Genth look to her laurels. The artist runs the gamut from the softest most delicate color scheme, as in the Monet-like "Reflections," to the stronger patterned figure works, as in "The Prome nade," a simply stunning portrayal of a young woman in a -blue and white checked suit. "Summer and the Sun" and the joy of life pervade Mr. Ritman's work. He has "arrived." Daniel Garber at Folsom's It was at Lumberville, Pa., in the viciniity of New Hope, the Redfield, Lathrop, Rosen country, that Daniel Garber painted the greater number of the canvases he is now showing at the Folsom Galleries, 560 Fifth Ave. He chose a! picturesque locality for in sniration as is evident in the entire collec tion, which is redolent of the true Garber ,individuality. Especially is this true of "The White Oak," with its fresh 'greens, beauti ful pattern and -the charm of sentiment which envelop it. "Dark River" also at tracts by its .depth of color and good values. whi,le scarcely less interesting are "Novem ber Day," "The Hunter," "Near Solebury" and "Little Red Brdg; National Society of Craftsmen This society is doing a' deal of work in its rooms at 119- East 19 St. At the last meeting Mr. Conrad Scappecchi gave a talk on the methods of the Naval Camouflage Corps, of which he was a member, and, with models of ships and painted: designs he explained the different systems adopted by the Allies to outwit the U boats. LAI-YUAN &CO. C. T. LOO 4 557 Fifth Avenue, New York Chinese Antiques -BRANCHES PARIS- SHANGHAI- PEKIN IIlt I . THORFINN KARLOEFNI Einar Joinsson (Sculptor) First of Historical Statues for Schuylkill River Bank, Phila.-Bequest of Ellen Phillips Samuel. A AMERICAN AR AMERICAN ART NEWS Etntered as second-class mail matter, February 5, 1909, at New York Post Office under the Act, March 3. 1879. Published Weekly from Oct. 15 to June 1 inclusive. Monthly from June 15 to Sept. 15 inclusive. AMERICAN ART. NEWS CO., INC. Publishers 15-17 East 40th Street Tel. 7180 Murray Hill TAMES B. TOWNSBND, President and Treasurer. 15-17 East 40th Street REGINALD TOWNSEND, Secretary. 15-17 East 40th Street SUBSCRIPTION RATES YEAR. IN ADVANCE $3.00 Canada -3.35 Poreign Coun_tries --3.75 Single Copies- .10 WHERE ART NEWS MAY BE OBTAINED IN NEW YORK Brentano's - - Fifth Ave. and 27th St. Powell's Art Gallery - - 983 Sixth Ave. WASHINGTON Brentano's - - - - F and 12th Streets MONTREAL Milloy's Book Store, 241 St. Catherina St. W. Chapman - 190 Peel St. LONDON Art News Office - 17 Old Burlington St. Bottom, News. Agent, 32 Duke St., St. James, S. W. PARIS Chaine & Simonson - 19 Rue Caumartin Vol. XVII. New York, March 15, 1919 No. 23 CHANGE OF ADDRESS When a change of address is requested, both the new and old address should be given. Two weeks' notice is required for changing an address. When extra copies of any issue are required, advance notice of the number of copies so required.should reach this office at latest hy Thursday afternoon .of any week. . Later orders frequently cannot be filled. ART AND BOOK SALE CATA L7 OGS-The American Art News, in connection with its Bureau of Expertis ing and Valuation, can furnish catalogs of all important art and book sales, with names of buyers and prices, at small charge for time and labor of writing up and cost of catalog when such are de luxe and illustrated. APPRAISALS- "EXPERTISING" The "Art News" is not a dealer in art or literary property but deals with the dealer and to the advantage of both owner and dealer. Our Bureau of "Ex pertising and Appraisal" has conducted -some most important appraisals. Om-il - F . r. -A-? . AMERICAN ART NEWS m.? ? Z;-- - - - LONDON LETTER London, March 1, 1919. Owing to an epidemic of burglary which seems to have accompanied demobilization it has not been considered wise to proceed to6 rapidly with the restoration of the na tional art-treasures to their normal dwelling ' places. The greatest secrecy is being pre served as to the plans of the authorities in regard 'to this branch of "reconstruction," and so far the precautions taken have met with the greatest success. Not a single work has either been damaged, lost or - stolen in transit, a fact which testifies to the efficiency of the methods pursued. A number of works spent their time in-prison, - having been con-veyed for safety to Bodmin, jail in Cornwall, far from the air raid ! area!- It is .rather significant of the value 'ttached~ to our public monuments that only two out of,their entire number (I am speak ilfg, of course, of those in open spaces) were considered worthy of special treat ment. These were the.statues of Charles I at Charing Cross and of James II behind the Admiralty, both of which are now emerging from their sandbag and corru gated iron enclosures. I belie-ve that if a benevolent Gotha had summarily disposed of the majority of our other public statutes, the only feeling -that we should have dis played in the matter would have been one of'gratitude!, Some Modern Draughtsmen There -has been of late an absolute orgy r of "private vie'ws," maily of which have been of more than usual interest. At the Eldar - 2;,Gallery there is a show of Sickerts which is attfacting to Great Marlborough St. the many admirers of this artist's very personal t? alent. As ,to...the technique displayed in the drawiiigs and paintings there can be no dispute; he builds up his compositions with ' a craftsmansihip which one might journey far top-see equalled. But craftsmanship can never wholly satisfy, and it seems natural OA t the- Puritanical 'elenien't that, in spite of -all artist:ic exhortations to the contrary, it - onti' ues to persist in most of' us, and that wve should I-ookl for, some point of view some indivi'dual 'outlook-in addition. This is conspicuous- by its absence in the work of Walter' Sickert, who shows a thing most horribly as it is and leaves one to make his :bwn comments and draw one's own con r clusions. In- his revolt from the "pretty pretty". and the chocolate box he has gone to. the- other extreme, that of the "ugly - ugly" and the mortuary. Problems of at mosphere and light present fewer difficul ties to him than to most men, but he does ;- iHot bring to their solution any glow of emo tion, to transform-his canvases from sordid r ,reality to something more elevating in tone. - But:her& and there he iap!ures a mood and iminortalizes a moment, as in his "Chopin," a study of a woman .seated at a piano, in whiclh one- feels- t-he very sound and at-. ' mosphere of the music and the personality of. the ,pl,aye,r. It would, however,--seem to be- sheer perversity on his part that leads him" 5or the most to give permanence to the aspect of life which we would most willingly C forget and to' bring to the surface that C 7 which we would most gladly see submerged. Not 'even the' greatest technical skill and the most detached treatment can make m. urder scenes and an endless procession of iron bedsteads and unlovely nudes, accepta 5' ble for any length of time. - ,g~ ' Drawings -by Bairnsfeather ;,-"The Bairnsfeather drawings at the Great ci, 'rex Galleries, in Grafton'Street, are prov ;'ing an immense attraction and quite ft- ilariou~s crowds gather there daily to enjoy ,-' the infectious gaiety with which the Captain '.-managed' to imbue his drawings even in the :,-darkest da'ys of the war. 'Although he 'has t-the distinction of having created a distinct -type, or rather types, th'at 'absolutely per .''-sonlify the Cockney conscript, Bairnsfeather ,>'does not lay claim to,any great distinction .:- from'the purely artistic standpoint. He is -~ essentially a comic draughtsman and within that -limitati'on achieves his ends with a ,'buoyancy' that' b'espeaks infinite good tem p'er ~and an enviable youthfulness. 'He un rderstands the British '-Tommy" to a nicety ' rid ' n while oth'ers have keen depicting- wai .~i;i7cid'ent's more or less from the civilian's point of view, Bairnsfeather has shown it *,us fromi that of, the, army r!ank and file. It -,may be that his talent is in consequenc( ,:- fated to hav'e somewhat of a local vogue -'~for it,takes-a' Cockney thoroughly to appre '- ciate -a Cockney and it is doubtful whether ,','the full'flavor of his fun could be entire 13 ,--a,ppreciated outside his own country. -~-Another comic dra'ughtsman who at the prese,nt mo-ment' is adding' greatly to th( gaiety of th'e picture-viewing public, is H, D'M. Batemari, whose drawings' at the Leices -ter Gallery are causing a sort' of "queue" tc remind us of - our ante-rationed days ~:Thoulgh inclined to be a little obvious in his *appeal. he has the p'encil' of'the born humor ist and is so direct in his methodls that his caricatures seldom fail to find their mark ^'' We are all ready for laughter-in thecp days a fact which is eloquentlv-borne out by the ', way in whlich these mirthl-provoking exhibi -'tions are acclaimed by the public '. , - ~~~~~L. G. S. CHICAGO Mme. Lucas Robiquet, the French por trait painter, is still exhibitng at the An derson Art Galleries on Michigan Ave. rier portrait of Capt. Moffett reproduced on the front page of the ART NEWS of iViar. I has since passed into the Library ox the Great Lakes NavalTraining Stationand is regarded as a tine work. There are now a number of felicitous presentments oi women at Anderson's which incline one to the belief that a woman can paint her own sex better than a man for male artists are too much inclined to a realism in many of their pictures of members of the fair sex. In addition to these Mme. Robiquet has on view some excellent studies of children. Of these the little Breton peasant girl in Sun day attire with her prayer book in hand is ;perhaps the most admired and has found a purchaser in a prominent collector. A boy standing in the sun with the beach and blue waters as a background is popular. The artist's sympathetic handling of children is sufficient to commend her to art lovers. Some little studies of Arab life in this col lection are notable for a feeling of life and outdoor air achieved with a consistenL broad handling. Here is a sparkle and spontaniety of which portrait painters are not always capable so -different are . requirements of technique in the various branches of painting. A quick sketch of a French soldier is also admirable. The Foulke prize awarded by the Art Association of Richmond, Ind., has been given this year to Robert W. Grafton, for his painting, "St. Louis Cathedral." Mr. Grafton is well known in Chicago, and the prize painting was exhibited last year i special exhibiton of his works held at the Thurber Galleries. Mr. Grafton is now in New Orleans, where he is painting scenes of that city in the new activities that have come to it from the war. $200 Offered for Posters Favor, Ruhl & Co. are offering $200 in prizes for the best poster submitted by April 19. The prizes will be $100, $50 and $30. The public is invited to vote- on which poster will be awarded the prize by the judges. The first four persons guessing right will receive $5 each. Bidding-Plan Sale Succeeds The bidding-plan sale at Young's gal leries has had a strong response. Numer ous bids came from out-of-town. H. M. Kitchell's "Camp Under the Golden Sky" has received the highest bid so far $525. His "Closing Day" got a 65 per cent bid, the highest percentage to date. A curious story is conected with Kitchell. For years he worked, painting good pic tures of a peculiar luminous quality, which he sold for small prices, and was often hungry. Unscrupulous dealers, recognizing the quality of this unknown's work, smudged out his signature and substituted Ralph Blakelock's and reaped big sums. BUFFALO Two paintings recently purchased and owned by Mr. Schoellkopf are lent to the Albright Art Gallery for a period of two months, namely, "The Age of Wonder," by Campbell Phillips, and "Wildflowers," by Edward Potthast. The Buffalo Society of Artists opened its 25th annual exhibition in the north rooms of the Albright art gallery Mar. 1C last. The display is much above the. usua] standard and some good examples of paint ing and sculpture are shown. The Fellow ship Prize of $50 was awarded to. Ottc Schneider for his landscape,. "Reverie.' Thle three Hon. Mentions were respectively given to Miss Florence Bach for her "Por trait of Dr. William VVarren Quinton;' John Rummell for his landscape, "Jove'c Tree," and Robert North for his "A Belgiar Tower." PHILADELPHIA Sales at the Phila. Academy current ex hibition include Fred Wagner's "Winter Afternoon," favorably noticed in the ART NEWS review of Feb. 15; Wm. M. Paxton's 'Daguerreotype ;" Paul King's "Sailing Boats;" also the subjects of praise in the 3ame review; Ernest Lawson's "Autumn" aind "Winter, Harlem River;" a fountain figure in bronze by Albin Polasek. and a *'Figurine" by Genevieve Hamlin. The ex hibition is crowded on the free days and the voting on the picture for the "Phila Prize" by the visitors is very lively. The favorite is apparently Fred Waugh's "U. S. Transport Under Convoy," reproduced Feb. 15 on the first page of The AMERICAN ART NEWS. The award of the Fellowship Prize to a work in the exhibition by a member of that body was announced at a meeting- Mar. 13 when there was also a talk on "Art Memo rials" by Paul Bartlett, Thomas Hastings and a well known etcher and lithographer Departing from the usual custom of util izing the Sketch and Plastic Clubs for its annual show the Fellowship exhibits this year, the work of its artist members in the galleries of the Art Alliance, not so well suited or lighted perhaps, bu't much more accessible in the matter of location. The time for these Fellowship Exhibitions does not seem to be well chosen, current as it is with the academy's annual, and with which it suffers considerably by comparison. It is more than probable also that many of the works now on the walls of the Art Alliance were not found available by the Academy Jury of selections, leaving one somewhat as to the quality of the collection. However thisn may -be, there are two capital land scapes by Mary Butler, "Poplars in Octo ber" and "November in the Catskills." Wal ter Emerson Baum has fine effects in a snow-covered "Road;" charming in mysteri ous ambience of semi-obscure light is Cesare Ricciardi's "Moonlight Symphony;" Paulet to van Rockens renders the gay note of color of flag-draped streets in "During the Fourth Liberty Loan" and "Manufacturers' Club." There are delightful little pictures of "Troyes, France," by 0. Owen Stephens and sorne studies of "Fish Markets and Spar Yards," by Katherine L. Farrell. Leopold Seyffert shows his portrait sketch of Mr. Thayer, painted for the Liberty Loan fund. Pastels by Robert Henri are on exhibition at the Sketch Club until March 29. The artist was expected to give an informal after-dinner address on March 8, the day of the hanging of the sketches brought from the Montross gallery in N. Y., but was obliged, to postpone his visit until March 20, and Mr. Langdon Warner, director of the Penn. Museum, gave a talk on his experi en-ce in Siberia. Proposing to assis-t officials, commissions and committees connected with the erection of war memorials, a regional memorial com mittee has been formed here, including members of the Municipal Art Jury, heads of art institutions, architects, sculptors and painters, with a number of public-spirited men in other professions. The work of this local committee will supplement that of the general committee of the American Federa tion of Arts. Mr. John Frederick Lewis, president of the Pa. Academy, will give a talk on "Minia tures" at the Art Alliance upon the opening night, March 24, of an exhibition by mem 'bers of the Society of Miniature Painters. HIale Wins Public Vote Prize lPhilip Hale's "Gold and Water Lilies" *received the $200 popular vote prize at the current academy exhibzition. The second ,choice was F. J. Waugh's "Transports Un der Convoy" and the third Chas. Rosen's "Mo.rning Light." . Eugene Castello. PARIS LETTER Paris, March 1, 1919. At the Druet Galiery there is some re markable work in distemlper by that pas sionate cuiorist Gaudizzait., In this difficult med.um he has a very scrikinig bouquet ot blue flowers, chiefly delphinium-ls in vivid and intense blues in a white vase, that il lumines the whole room. Blue indeed i a favorite color with this artist and plays a ig role in most of his compositions. Both .n distemper and in oils he uses a curious coarse canvas scarcely covered with the medium, irregularities in the thread, knots and the like, cropping out with disconcert ing effect sometinmes in his- figure composi tions. An Ouled-Nail's face seems to have two warts on her chin. Most of the figure subjects are drawn from Algiers, and tawny skinls and dead black hair look out from white barnoas and jewelled bandeaux. uaudissart is a great colorist and has a oersonal touch, with' no claini to tlheories or "isms" of any sort. Nature-as he s'ees it--is the only religion he professes. There are some piquant contrasts in' his work. The woman witlh trailing purple robe, bathing in bright golden water on a warm rosy shore, hangs opposite a cool and cleverf bouquet of white fl9wers of a dozen diffe'rent. kinds, painted on a background of blue an'd'purpli in quiet, distant tones. This makes a beati tiful pendant to the blue delphiniums. Like the great Impressionists, it must be said that Gaudissart does not paint for the many, and the public who wander in and out of the Druet Gallery make startled comrn ments before certain of the works. Shows At Dealers' Galleries Not the least valuable of the educational idvantages offered in Paris are'the art ex' hibitions organized by the dealers all through .he year. The "one-man" shows, lasting ,-enerally a fortnight, afford a fine oppor, unity, of watching art developments and novements. Oddly enough the American iniform is very seldom seen at these pleas tnt little galleries, with their initimate air tnd agreeable settings of the works on ;iew. -At the moment, interest centres in -he Rue Royale, where Druet is shawing an important.series of paintings by anlartist who has nothing Flemish about him, except his birth and name, Vlaniinck. He was one of the "stalwarts" of the Independents and the Autumn Salon, and belongs to no s-ch'-ool but his own, although- he- may b-e said-to be affiliated to Cezanne. There is somethingC tremendous about everything he does; .his' skies are terrific in their forcefulness,"his' smallest cottages are piled up of such rhass-, ive stone, and his boats seem 'to threatens one with their volumes of iron and steam,. force. Vlaminck's mission seems to be to. destroy prejudice, for notwithstanding his' independent attitude towards art traditions,] there is great beauty as well as grea.t poWer, in his work, and his pictures are selling fast, at his show. Besides his canvases he has a' few watercolors and some mnost remarkable; pottery, ma'de and fired by'Methey an'd dec-'- - orated by Vlaminck, in a slightly Persian! style that, however, breathes wholly-of the artist. .Beautiful blues dominate.in-the great' dishes and handsome jars. On the walls, stro'ng luminous color glows from 'thee frames whatever the subject, whether some; small port full of craft, a bouquet of spr'ing, flowers, a snow scene, or a hill village inl the sunshine.. A. I. . TOLEDO (OHIO) - ' The museum closed its exhibitionl of war' po-sters;~ by Lucian Jonas~ and English' artists, anld of oils by Karl Kappes, a local artist, Mar. 1, anld iS. nlOW showingu oils by Jonas Lie, monotypes by H. - Wv. Rubins, and oils by two local artists, J. E. Dean and Grace Rhodes Dean.: The second annlual- spring exhibit:ion. of Toledo artists' work will be held at the museum during April. 'The jury will be composed of George W. Stevens, dir.ector of the Jmuseum, and members. of the loc.al Federation of Art Societies: Josephine Ormonld Calder, the Athlena Society;J.; E;. Dean Artklan, and Karl Schwartzkopf. Toledo Tile Club.-'X *'A small gallery has been set aside at-the museum. for the display of local artists: -work. -'Each month there will be 'an ex hib'ition of local talent, either by one' c-r two men-or women. These exhibiGts vwill conitinue for a year or lonlger, giving every artist in the city an1 opportunity to e?thib'it. Forty cash prizes will -be giyen, by~ the Victory Garden Association 'of Toledo for the best poster urging an increase, of fQood, nroduction this coming summer. Profes-: .ionals and school children will corrpetet The prizes range from $25 to $1. . , The 'painting, "Flight inlto Egypt," by' Sandor Landeau, shown at the MQhr' Gal-' leries, has been sold. A coming display at, these galleries will be one of wratercolors by' th e late F. Hopkinson Smith. Franlk -Sottek. From the exhibtion of "The Ten"'now on at the Corcoran Gallery, ten' oaintins' hiave been sold, including a still-life by' E-dmuuid Tarbell an1d the figure painting, "Red and Gold," by Frank Benson.'' ' Mr. Montross invites attenti-on to the exhibition of Mr. Horatio \alker's recent work hch includes pic tures that a.e among the greatest. 7VarcA lI t/i to 29tA MONTROSS GALLERY 550 FIFTH AVENUE NEW YORK. N. Y. above 45th Street 6 . AMERfICAN ART NEW-S P.& D. COLNAGHI &OBACH (ESTABLISHED 1760), Publisher by, Appointment to King George Dealers in Paintings, Drawings, Engravings and Etchings by Old and Modern Masters. Experts, Valuers and Publishers. 144-145-146, NEW BOND ST., LONDON, W. Cabl Address, COLNAGHI, LONDON Warwick House Ltd. .45 EAST 57th STREET NEW YORK Announces an exhibition of rare Antique French Furniture and Objets d'Art of the' Louis XV & Louis XVI Periods held in conjunction with Messrs. Henry Symons & Co of London XVIII CENTURY PORTRAITS An important collection of 500 paintings made over a period of twenty years by a Connoisseur including fine examples by Gainsborough Romney Reynolds Raeburn Beechey Allan Ramsay Gilbert Stuart Opie Northcote is -now for sale by private treaty and can be viewed at THE PEMBROKE GALLERIES; Ltd. 81 Park Street, Bristol, England Write for photographs and full particulars Telephone Plaza 6093 EMILE PARES -APPRAISERS Importer of Antiquities and Art-Object, -- 7ableaux 20 East 55th Street - New York Parir-11 Place diu Palais Bourbon EXHIBITIONS NOW ON Continu'ed from page 2. Old English Art at Vernay's An unusually fine collection of English XVIII century art objects was as'sembled by Mr. Arthur S. Vernay during his recent visit to England and is nlOW on view at his galleries, 12 E. 45 St. The examples of oak dressers, mahogany, walnut and satinwood furniture, and 'prod ucts of Adam, Chippendale and Hepple white, English porcelain dessert and tea services, and also of Sheffield plate are- of especial interest, while the' collection of English silver, including piec'es datinlg from 1700 to 1800 is of equal importanc'e.' Royal Worcester and Crown Derby arel represented by two remarkable services, and other porcelains,'comprising exa'mples of Spode, Pinxton and a Sevres 'dessert service of much distinction, add to th'e value of the exhibition. Another noteworthy item is a rare Chelsea group of girl and boy with corn sheaf and metal branches fitted with porcelain flowers. There are three Wedgwood'and Bentley agate vases of muchl beauty and several specimens of' Venetian glass.'' - . The Countess Kasimir Djiekonska has recently completed the portrait of Miss Catherine Wilcox, a charming subject. painted with 'much, sympathly. At' her stuflio, 1947 Broadway, she is now painlting Miss Nydia S. in a color schemle of gray and purple, and a decidedtly interestinlg presentment of Mrs. George Van der Kley. FRENCH & COMPANY Works of Art 6 EAST 56th STREET, NEW YORK ANTIQUE TAPESTRIES VELVETS EMBROIDERIES FURNITURE Gilbert Gaul at City Club Although a versatile painter, successful in l'andscape, genre and portraits, as well as his military subjects, Gilbert Gaul, when invited to exhibit at the City Club. was asked to show a group of the latter, since it was through his war pictures that his early reputation was made. These make a good showin'g on the walls of the club's galleries 'with' their fresh color, dramatic composition ancr sense of action. The can vases are, in the main, records of tlle Great War, and in their pathos of action and sen timent testify to the artist's rare imagina tion with his technical 'ability. Good color and careful drawing lhave always character ized his work,'but these last works, broad ly painted and witlh their 'ring of sincerity, are perhaps the best he has yet produced. Of especial initerest is his rendition of "Music Hath Charrms," which illustrates the story, now so well known, of the young German violinist 'who daily stood, out in "No Man's Lanid" and played his violin while the' armies of the belligerent.% ceased their killing to listen for, a time to the strains of the 'music. In a trench in the foregroun'd some wounded "Tommies" relax as their pain is mitigated by the art of the boyish musician in the distance, while far beyond'the Germans have momentarily laid down their arms. One of the pictures shows a burning village 'from which refugees flee in terror from guns and fire. Battlefields are vividly depicted, hospitals with nurses are in evidence, and soldiers gay an-d grave are portrayed. Painter-Gravers at Art Alliance The third annual exhibition of the P'ainiters-Gravers of America is nlow oln at tlhe galleries of the Art Alliance of America, 10 E. 47 St., until Mar. 29.' The. display of black and white prints and certaiii woodblocks in color is rich and varied. Manly of. the print-makers are represe.nted and the showing has been ad mirably hung under the direction of Miss Florence Levy of the Alliance. Among the better known exlhibitors are George Bellows, Boltoni Browni, Randall Davey, Sears Gallagher, -Anne Goldthwaite, Ernest. Haskell, Childe Hassam, Eugene Higgins, Troy Kenney, Alleii Lewis, F. Luis Mora, Jerome My'ers, Josepli Pennell, Rudolph' Ruzicka, Albert Sternier anid Ma honri Young. Further notice of the display will be made next week. Bookplates at Columbia The American Bookplate Society is hold ing its fourth annual exhibition of contem porary-bookplates at the Avery library, Co !lunmbia 'University, until March 31, open 'from -10 A. M. to 4 P. M. daily. The object 'of the exhibition is to advance the art of the modern bookplate, but it also serves, ;by a system of awards, to provide new coiners in the field and'-prospective owners wth something tangible with which to sup plement their judgment in their choice of design. The exlhibition also furnishes:'the mneans for a comprehensive study and re 'view of this particular artistic line of effort. Ernest Haskell at Mussmann Gallery Etchings, drypo'ints and' engravings by Erniest Haskell, includinig early and recent work, are being shown at the Mussmann Gallery, 144 W. 57 St., to March 31. Mr. Haskell's work in black and 'whi'te enjoys a deservedly hligh reputation, and his studies of tree forms are well known. In the present exhibition they have aprom inent place and are characterized, by minutely worked out detail in- every point. Perfection of draughtsmanship and artistic composition make each1 one of these tree pictures a thinlg of beauty and a subtle representation of nature, instinct with life and character., Leon Kroll is painltinlg a portrait of a woman at his studio, 252 W. 42 St. He re cently completed two nudes. BOSTON Arthur C. Goodwin, in his coming show at the Guild of Boston Artists, will include several figure paintings. Hitherto he has been known chiefly as a landscape painter. Dwight C. Sturges has been mixing up lithographic experiments of late with his etching work and the result will be shown for the first time shortly at a Newbury St. gallery. Dodge MacKnight's annual exhi bition of watercolors will open March 20 at a Newbury St. gallery. Watercolors by William E. B. Ranken, illustrating stately interiors of English and American mansions, are on exhibition at a Newbury St. gallery. Mr. Ranken is happy in securing an individual atmosphere in each of his pictures, and is always equal to the representation of the elegancies and intricacies of textures, forms and tones that his specialty requires. Among the Ameri can subjects are the music room of Faulk ner farm, Brookline, and three interiors of the Widener house in Elkins Park, Pa. Small portraits -by Miss Lucy M. Stanton and small sculpture by Miss Elizabeth.Ran dolph Royce are also on view at this gallery. A special loan exhibition of drawings by old and modern masters is on at the Fogg Museum, Camibridge, until April i. F. W. Coburn, for a number of years art critic of fhe Boston Herald, holds that posi tion no longer, it is understood. E. C. Sherburne. MONTREAL At the Arts C,lub there is now on exhibi tioin a collection of paintings by the late Tom Thompson, of Toronto, a compara tively young artist, whose death was of a tragic nature. An upturned canoe on a lonely 'lake, and his 'sensitive disposition, led to' the conclusion that the sad occur rence was niot accidental., Thompson had -be'en one of those who felt that the ten'dency 'of Canadian land scape painters was too much in choosing for their themes those parts of Canada that had been long settled, anid when the landscape had - taken on a 'British mildness, out of keeping with the typical unbroken strength of a new country. He sbught, therefore, that wild and rugged region about the Georgian Bay in Northern Ontario, anid practically made it his home,-as we'll as .his painting ground. He approached his subject with a keen sense of decorative effect, and made direct s'tatements of color schemes, forceful in their intensity, although not forced beyond the truths of nature. As paintings they obviously do not attempt to render the more subtle qualities of atmosphere. They rely upon the line, and the pattern pre sented, and the virile note, in impasto pig ment, that suggests primal nature un touched by the hand of man. Early"sprincg and autumn .seem- -to inspire his finest effort, endowing with infinite charm such homely material as a waste of rock and swamp, friezes of r:agged spruce, or birch, trees seeking a scant living from the meagre soil on the rocks. Yet in a winter subject he has given us a beautiful rendering of snow-laden tall bushes, their branches bend ing in umbrella form, towards the spectator, and long sun-shadows in foreground, form ing a most decorative effect. One does not find the influence of any particular school of painting in Thompson's work, other than a possible similarity toI mome modern Swedish art, where subjectst ire of a like nature. This, however, would1 be only coincidental, as Thompson's knowl-t edge of foreign painting was' confined to such casual exhibitons as might be seen *in Poronlto. He was without' trainling in theI ,trict sense; his inner ViSiOnl alone guided iim. In hisX untimely death it is felt that t genlius in its first blossoming has been l ost to the community of Canadian artists. C Many of the pictures now on exhibition 1 ~ave been loaned by private owners, and'A )thers, not included, are the property ofu ihe National Gallery. A. D. P. p DUVEEN BROTHERS PARIS-NEW YORK TAPESTRIES PORCELAINS OBJETS d'ART S. T. SMTHH & SON OLD MASTERS PASTELS 37 Duke Street, St. iai!nes', London ESTABLISHED 1 790 H. VAN SLOCHEM OLD MASTERS Objets d'Art 26c, King St., St James's, London, S. W. 1 Ternay Old English FurnitureOld E English Pottery-Old Eng lish Glass- Old English Sil. ver-Old English Pewter, Original Examples. New York. 10, 12, 14 E. 45th Str-ee _ London, W. 217 Pia adilly Bourgeois Galleries Old and - Modern Masters 668 Fifth Avenue New York HARTFORD (CONN.) The Conn. Academy of Fine .Arts will hold its ninth annual exhibi-tion' in the Aknnex of the Wadsworth Athenaurn, Akpr 14 to 27, inclusive. Contributors are' idvised to sen'd works of. moderate' size,' nd not mor,e than two works by ea'ch c'on tributor will be placed. ,The jury is corn )osed of Daniel,F. Wentworth, Albertus'E. rone,s, Mabel Bacon English, Frances, Elud ,on Storrs, James G. McManus', Edward 'ield, Joseph H. Greenwood, Guy C. Wig yins, Louis Gudebrook, Matilda Browne {an Wyck and Harold Green. '' The Charles Noel Flagg prize of $100 vill be awarded the sixth time for the best vork shown. The Dunham. prize- of $25 will e awarded the eighth time for the, best )ortrait shown by a man under 35. The -1udsoni prize of $25 given in memory, of he late Dr. William M. Hudson, for the est work by a woman, will be awarded-'for he sixth time. '< PITTSBURGH,' In the galleries of the Carnegie 'Institute' here will open on Founder's-Day in April' n exhibition devoted entirely to the work ,f Abbott H. Thayer, presenlting a thorough y representative group of' his pictures. {any private 'collections are' being drawn pon for -the purpose, and the result iromises to be remarkable. - *PA r . 7 r s . . . . - AMERICAN ART- NEWS - . 7 . . . . . * . . W.40 tliwat 9,.w. . . . . ' f s ' ' ' . 'lE';. \' ' - ' W- ' ' ;1LS ; ^ ,*' ' <. , . .. . __ i '.: , . t-.,' W_, tUe i,\ PA' _ W . s S. ' ' ' J bi L. 8,- . t.... > . . ; D*- . k- . ': ' D L; : , .. a . . , v h ',?T - ' ' ' ' . . , S. . ,' - . t . . . - kS- INNESS . H;, . . .. ::; - -- a PAIN-TINGS s - - IlllllHlllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII!IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIN c.. r, ' , - _ - ' r . ' . _ . . ' , , . > ? ? ' ' ' * ' ' * Eok a n v _ _ * , / ws {s * . i _ , , X ! 1. v t R ' R w a \ '; ' , X _ ' - ? . * ' # b .' , ! ^ ## ? t? ? ' ' ' i ' ' _ ' _ . * t ' _ t _ E: 1: , 0 t1 't - _ ' ' ' ' ' ' - ' :. .. . . . . . . .. - , . _ - X *,;' i F ' -, - . - I ' ' x <o. . ' 0 ' ' ' ' ' , ' - ' . , _ S F. _, ., I ' . ' ' ' , ' - . ' ' - ' ; E, _ , : L: ' ' F ' _! , H='' f ' * _ _ k - -, .-., ... W. - . ! . . . . ..=. , . ? 0 - - ;; ?GEORGE H. AINSLIE -- 0615 Fifth cAvenue . 4-.. -- - at 49th Street .. ; . . F : NEW YORK CITY 7 t _ - s - , # .'' fs , ' . >; . '- . 1' "' rsX,- I # s. F .N..' F .., gs ;; . t: +' i:' u ' N. F., > . . r t bm :s . S >.' k e" >' ' ' E B p.: r iL ' Fr:' '- r 8 - AMERICAN ART NEWS& ART AND BOOK SALES Aubrey Beardsley Drawings A collection of original drawings by Aubrey Beardsley, is now at the Ander son Galleries. Mr. Frederick H. Evans, of London, who collected these examples of Beardsley's art, was instrumental in geting the artist his commission to illustrate "Le Morte D'Arthur," and -many of the draw ings shown are the originals for this work. "Woman and Big Toad-stools," "Three Swans" and "How Tristan Drank the Potion" are characteristic examples of the artist's weird imagination. There is a realistic drawing entitled "Two Figures in an Attic," well handled in wash anid pen and ink, with a freedom showing that the genius of the artist lay not alone in sinuous lines and strange imaginings. 'Hail Mary" is an early work done when Beardsley was still a clerk in an insurance office, anid a portrait of "Rejane" is also rather unusual, done in red pastel and black ink; A few of the drawings are mere ly full page boarders, but they contain a wealth of decorative design. Shown in the same gallery with the Beardsley drawings is the Miss Caroline Choate collection of colored mezzotints, with additions from various sources. The modern mezZotints of the collection are by S. Arlent Edwards, Sydney Ernest Wilson and other prominent engravers. Several of the French XVIII century mezzotints are of rare interest, and the American engrav irtigs include examples by H. D. Greenhead, E. M. Hester, Clifford R. James and F. G. Stevenson. These two collections will be on exhibition until their sale Mar. 20. Simmons Paintings Sale A collection of 270 oils paintings, former - lythe property of Mrs. W. H. Simmonis of Canandaigua, N. Y., with additions from other sources, dispersed at the Fifth Avenue Auction Rooms, on the eves. of Mar. 5, 6 and 7, brought a total of $11,169.50. The range of prices was fair; the highest, - 225, was paid by Mr. Burnett,-for No. 231, "Breaking In," by Frederic Remington, 23 x 32. Other pictures sold, with catalog number, title, artist's name, size, buyer and price follow: No. 136, "Evening," Bruce Crane, 9x13, S. Neu mann, $185. No. 242, "A Spring Morning in Belgium," Franz Van Leemupten, 26x32, H. Hegeman, $117.50. No. 122, "The Port of Ostend," Theodore Weber, 13X2x22. Henry C. Ryerson, $100. No. 225, "Temptation of St. Anthony," Leon Herbo, 58x42, Mr. Jansen, $140. No. 140, "Midsummer Landscape,"' Emile Lam Nbinet, 13x18, Arlington Galleries, $85. No. 246, "Girlhood," Gustave Jacquet, 18x14?2 Arlington Galleries, $80. No. 105. "Ideal," Gustave Jacquet, 22x185/2, H. D. CG. Rohlfs, $75. No. 195, "Nocturne," A. P. Lucas, 25x30, A. W. Barr, $75. No. 110, "Landscape and Cattle," Adolphe Charles Marais, 24x32, H. D. G. Rohlfs, $65. No. 113, "Vesta," Louis de Schryver, 24x30, H. D. 'G. Rohlfs, $60. No. 131, "Evening After the Shower," A. Wend xnaier, 12x21, J. Rosenblatt, $60. No. 209, "On the Ocean," James G. Tyler, 30x24, Mr. Burnett, $57.50. No. 211, "Cats," Henrietta Ronner, 22x27, Mr. Fliermans, $55. 7 r No. 108, "Approaching Storm," Jules Dupre, 17x21, J. Rosenblatt, $52. No. 127, "Morning Landscape," Jean B. C. Corot, a 5x22, Weitenmeyer Bros., $50. Lai Yuan Art Object Sale A total of $19,017.50 was realized for the sale of Chinese works of art, including carvings in jade, amethyst, precious stones, 'wood, amber and ivory, also, potteries and -porcelains, enamels, lacquers and paintings, 'consigned by Lai Yuan & Co., at the An derson Galleries, onl the afts. of Mar 7 and 8. The feature of the sale, No. 335, Chien lung lapis lazuli mountain carving, 8?/ in. * i., 13 in. 1, was purchased by I. 0. Folsom for $725. -Nos 376-7 to Chien-lung jade plants, 3 ft. 7 in. h., went to H. Counihan, a,gent, for $1,100. Other in-teresting items sold were: -No. 308, Chien-lung carved jade temple, 23 in. high.. I. O.,T'olsom, $450. No. 300, ,pair Chien-lunlg jade dishes. 8 in. diam. I. 0. Folsom, $410. No. 301, Chien-lung white jade koro, 5 in. h. J. D. Kelly, $400. * No. 305. Chien-lung white iade vase, with cover, 12 in. high. R. N. Moore, $325. No. 199, pair Kang-shi trlue and white temple jars, 12'/2 in. high. Tonying & Co., $280. No. 349, Chiien-lung ivory parrot cage, on stand, stand 100 in. high. Tonyinga &R Co.. $270. No. 307, Chien-lung jade mou1ntainl, 16 in. long. N\o. 303a, Chien-lung light green jade vase, with cover, 9?5/ in. Irving Berlinl, $220. No. 342. Kang.shi painting of Phoenixes, 73 in. by 43?2 in. Mrs. H. Clewvs, $210. Aeronautics-Railroads Library Sale A collection of rare books on1 aeroniau tics anld early works on railroads formed by an English collector, dispersed at the An derson Galleries Mon. aft., brought a total of $7;329. George D. Smith purchased the entire collection o~f works on railroads. Nos. 96 509, for $5,500, and paid $200 for No. 69, The Oracle of the Arts (London, 1824), -rare publication on balloons, etc. l Old and Modern PAINTINGS New York Chicago Paris 565 Fifth Avenue 536 S. Michigan Avenue 12 Place Vendome NOTICE TO GALLERIES Changes in the copy of advertisements and calendar must reach the office not later than Wednesda.y of each week. ARTISTS' EXHIBITION CALENDAR CONNECTICUT ACADEMY OF FINE ARTS, HARTFORD, CONN.-Ninth annual exhibition, April 14-27. Exhibits received April 7 at the An nex of the Wadsworth Atheneum, Atheneum St., Hartford, Conn. NATIONAL ACADEMY OF DESIGN, FINE ART GALLERIES, 215 W. 57 St.-Ninety-fourth annu al exhibition, March 18 to Apr. 27. NEW- HAVEN PAINT 4ND CLAY CLUB, Yale School of Fine Arts, New Haven.-Nineteenth ex hibition, April 1-20. Exhibits received March 21 at Yale School of Fine Arts, corner of Chapel & High Sts., New Haven, Conn. CALENDAR OF SPECIAL NEW YORK EXHIBITIONS Anderson Galleries, Park Ave. and 59 St.-Paint ings of Hindustan, by S. Fyzee-rahamin. To Apr. 2. Arthur Ackermann & Son, Inc., 10 E. 46 St.-Medal lions in wax by Ethel Frances Mundy, to March 15. Arlington Art Galleries, 274 Madison Ave.-Works by American artists, through March. Arden Gallery, 599 Fifth Ave.-Small sculptures by Frances Grimes and Laura Gardin Fraser, with painted panels and Brocades. March 18-April 7. Ardsley Studios, 110 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y.-Japanese prints representing "Scenes of Barbaric Life," original lithographs by Fantin Latour, and recent paintings by Albert Gleizes, one of the recognized leaders of the modernistic move ment in France, -to March 31. Art Alliance of America. 10 E. 47 St.-Third annual exhibition of The Painter-Gravers of America, to March 29. Babcock Galleries, 19 E. 49 St.-Eighth annual ex hibition of paintings by William Robinson Leigh. March 19-April 7, Brooklyn Socitey of Artists, Pouch Gallery, 345 Clin ton Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.-Second annual exhibi tion, to March 24. In connection -with this showing there is an exhibition of Thumb-box sketches. The Macsoud Medal will be awarded by votes to be cast by active members. Bonaventure Galleries, 601 Fifth Ave.-Paintings, engravings. autographs, busts, statuettes, etc., rela tive to American history. Through March. Bourgeois Gallery, 668 Fifth Ave.-Modern paintings, City Club, 55 W. 44th St.-#Pictures by Gilbert Gaul. To March 22. Columbia University, Avery Architectural Library. Ex Libris fourth annual exhibition. To March 15. Daniel Gallery, 2 W. 47 St.-Recent paintings by Ernest Lawson, through March 22. Durand-Ruel Gallery, 12 E. 57 St.-Paintings by Boudin, to March 19. Ehrich Gallery, 707 Fifth Ave.-Colored monotypes by well known-prominent American artists, includ ing Steiner, Higgins, Prendergast, Sloan and Pach. March 17-Apr. 5. Ferargil Gallery, 24 E. 49 St.-Works by Charles Rosen, through March. 556-558 Fifth Ave.-Under the direction of Mrs. Al bert Sterner, paintings by Louis Kronberg, through March. Lithographs by James A. McNeil Whistler. Folsom Gallery, 550 Fifth Ave.-Paintings by Daniel Garber, to March 31. Hotel Bossert, Brooklyn, N. Y.-Paintings by Alice' Judson and George Pearse Ennis. To April 1. Kennedy & Co., 613 Fifth Ave.-Fine prints, ancient and mcdern, through March. Kingore Galleries, 24 E. 46 St.-American paintings and sculpture, to March 22. Little Gallery-Antique Italian textiles; modern Italian glass and pottery. Lotos Club, 110 W. 57 St.-Paintings from the col -lection of Charles L. Baldwin. March 22-25. Macbeth Gallery, 450 Fifth Ave.-Annual exhibition of thirty paintings by thirty artists, Through March 29. Paintin gs by Louis Ritman, recently returned from France, to March 22. MacDowell Club; 108 W. 35 St.-Group exhibition until March 23. Mulch Galleries, 108 W. 57 St.-Paintings by Lillian Genth, March 17-29. Metropolitan Museum, Central Park at 82 St. E. Open daily from 10 A. M. to 5 P. M., Saturdays until 10 P. M., Sundays 1 P. M. to 5 P. M. Ad mission, Monday and Friday, 25c., free other days. Montclair Art Museum, Montclair, N. J.-Etchings and prints owned by the residents of Montclair. Through March. Montross Gallery, 550 Fifth Ave.-Paintings by Ho ratio Walker, to March 29. Mussmann Gallery, 144 W. 57th St.-Etchings by Ernest Haskell, through March. National Arts Club, Gramercy Park-Exhibition of war housings, to Apr. 1. New York Public Library-Print Gallery (Room 321) -The War Zone in Graphic Art, including etch ings and other prints depicting eastern France and Belgium during the seventeenth-nineteenth cen turies. Memorial exhibitions of etchings by J. C. Nicoll and wood engravings by Elbridge Kingsley. Wa! lithographs by Brangwyn, Bone, Pennell and Copley. Print Gallery (room 321) War Zone in Graphic Art.-Stuart Gallery (room 316): Master Ornamentalists. Paint Box, 43 Washington Square South.-Paintings by F. Gerhardt Schwarz, and his wife, Gertrude Strunk Schwarz, formerly instructors in the Chicago Art Institute. through March. Plymouth Institute, Orange St., Brooklyn, N. Y. Paintings by James Weiland of the Poplar St. stu dios, lately at the Hotel Bossert. To March 31. Salmagundi Club, 47 Fifth Ave.-Oils by members, to March 22. Satinover Galleries, 27 W. 56 St.-Paintings by old masters and art objects. Sh,rwood Studios, 58 W. 57 St.-Louis M. Eilshe mius, M. A., early spring exhibition of his paintings to March 21. Gallery of Miss Alice M. Swift, 11 E. 55 St.-Draw ings, pastels, and dry points by Virginia H. Wood, until May 8. Union League Club, Fifth Ave. and 39 St.-French figure paintings and American landscapes. To March 15. Washington Square Exchange Gallery, 63 Washington Square South.-Sculpture and drawings by Gertrude Boyle. To March 26. Whitney Studio, 8 W. 8 St.-Works by Malvina Hoff man and Arthur Crisp, to March 18, incl. CALENDAR OF AUCTION SALES. American Art Galleries, Madison Square South. Large collection of old and modern paintings to be sold for account of whom it may concern. Thurs. and Fri. eves., March 20 and 21. Exhibition to date of sale. The extensive and valuable stock of the N. Y. branch of the noted art publishers, Manzi-Joyant & Co., suc cessors of Goupil & Co. of Paris. Afts., March 20, 21, 22, 24,-25, 26 & 27; eves., March 24, 25, 26 & 27. Exhibition to dates of sales. The extensive stock of rare and beautiful antique textiles and embroideries of the widely known con noisseurs and "experts," Vitall & Leopold Benguiat, of N. Y. and Paris, now discontinuing both estab lishments. Apr. 7-12 inclusive, afts. Exhibition April 2 to date of sale. Anderson Galleries, Park Ave. and 59 St. The library of Robert Sedgwick, embracing a large number of books on Africa, China, India, Japan, and the Far East at large; Artic and Antarctic ex ploration; historic sea tales, maritime adventures and yachting; Americana generally and many Rhode Island items, particularly biography and genealog5 books about book-plates; 'a considerable group of works on horses, polo and sport. March 17-18 afts. Autograph letters and documents relating to French history collected by the late Hon. George P. Marsh, and a collection of American historical let ters and documents from various sources. The French collection contains many important auto graphs of statesmen, soldiers and rulers, including 14 Napoleon autographs. The American collection is strong in Revolutionary material, including letters from Bene4 ict Arnold, Gens. Burgoyne, Jefferson, Lafayette, Lord Sterling. George and Martha WashW ington, and the Revolutionary correspondence of Robert Morris and General Greene, 54 letters. Mar. 19-20, afts. Some 43 original drawing by Aubrey Beardsley, con signed by Mr. Frederick H. Evans of London, in whose possesion they have been since they were made. To be followed by a sale of colored mezzotints by S. Arlent Edwards, Sidney E. Wilson and other modern engravers, with a number of French XVIII century colored mezzotints, some of American in terest, the collection of Miss Caroline Choate, with additions from other sources. March 20, evening. Modern etchings and lithographs collected by Ham-. ilton Easter Field. Etchings by the Barbizon art ists, by Mervon, ,Legros. Whistier, Cameron, etc. Lithographs, mostly by French artists of the XI X century, Isabey, Danmier, Delacroix, Raffet, Bernet, Noel, Fautin, Latour, Odilon, Radon, and a complete set of the scarce publication, "La Caricature," Mar. 21, eve. Heartman's, 129 E. 24 St.-Rare Americana, Fri, morn., March 28, at 11 o'clock. BOSTON, MASS.-C. F. Libbie & Co.-Part II,1 M-Z of the private library of the late Frederic H.. Hedge. Brookline, Mass. Rare and curious books,] poetry, Mother Goose, and other fables, Broadsitae ballades, art books, Shakespeare and other drama tists, old plays, emblems. Walton and Cotton's An gler, Wigglesworth's Day of Doom, 1673, rare third edition, and many books in fine bindings. March 26, at 2 P. M., and March 27, at 10 and 2 o'clock. Part I, A-L of the private library of the late Fred eric H. Hedge. Brookline, Mass., formerly librarian of the Public Library, Lawrence, Mass. Rare andI curious books, old ballads, songs, chap books, min strelsy, wit, humor, fables, emblems, early Amer-C ican and English songsters and broadsides. Colle tion of Cruikshankiania, and colored plate boaolKs by Rowlandson, phiz. Leech, etc. Rare old edition8' classics, Aldine, Elzevir and Plantin presses, mtaiJ,r in beautiful bindings. Wed. and Thurs.. March-1t) and 20, each day at 10 and 2 o'clock. AUCTION EXHIBITIONS Anderson Galleries, Park Ave. and 59 St.-Colored mnezzotints by modern engravers. Fine French-l XVIII century colored mezzotints, including s0rhe of American interest. From the collection of Miisi Caroline Choate, and from other sources To da3e of sale, March 20. Library of Robert Sedgwick. A comprehensive c; lection of books of travel, exploration and advein. ture, natural history, sport, biography, memoirs, and miscellaneous literature. To dates of sale, March 1-7 18. - Important French historical autographs collected by the late Hon. Geo. P. Marsh, and American his' torical autographs from various consignors. T?o' dates of sale, March'19-20. Beginning Mar. 14.-Lithographs and etchinks from' the ,collection of Hamilton Easter Field, to date -of sale, March 21. t aeo Chinese works of art. Sold to close the estate of the'i late Rufus E. Moore, with-additions from the pril vate collection of Mrs. Rufus E. Moore. Begin_; ing Mar. 22 to date of sale, Mar. 27. Ashmead Picture Sale The sale of the pictures of the Henry B Ashmead collection at the galleries of Sam uel T. Freeman & Co., Phila., March -1-1 resulted in fair prices for most of the worksJ but not such as would break any records Knoedler & Co. were the purchasers of Ad. Schreyer's "Bedouin Arabs" (48 x 75) for; the highest figure of the sale, $4,800. The same firm also secured a landscape by: Munkacsky, "In the Forest of Fontaine bleau" (46 x 75), for $2,500, and a fine ex-, ample of Alfred Stevens' "Farewell" (48yy' x 36y2) for $525. "Sheep Entering the Barn" (26 x-21/2), by Jacque, a typical work' and unusually attractive, went to Mr. S. S.' Laird for $4,300. A characteristic example of E. van Marcke's "Cattle" (22Y2 x 33 Y4),. was purchased by Mr. Felin for $2,100: to" the same buyer went Jules Dupre's "After-, noon in the Holland Meadows" (18 x 22),4 for $1,900. - Clapp & Graham secured an-' other Dupre, "In the Meadow Lands" (13 x 203/4), for $1,100; J. L. Gerome's panel,, "Anl Arabian Steed" (21Y2 x 1734), for $875; "In Forest of Fontainebleau"' (26 x 22),b.y. Diaz, for $2,100, and "Afternoon in-Hyde., Park" (43 x 72), by De Nittis, for $170.. Gustave Jacquet's panel (16 x 12), "Forty Winks," went to Col. James Elverson for: $160. "The Island of Billancourt"' (15Y2 X 23X2), by M. Rico, was purchased for $ by Dr. Bertolette of Reading, Pa. Another example of Jacquet, "Betsy," a panel (12Y2 x 9Y4), and a panel (12 x 16), by Cesare Detti, "A Tie," went to Mr. Derbyshire for, $310 and' $425, respectively. Mr. Frank D. Kane secured a fine exam ple of Edward Moran, "Ocean. Waves,'> painted in 1871 (24' x 42Y2): The Rosen bach galleries purchased Milne Ramsey's "Nature Morte" for $50, a fine still life, by the American master of that branch of art. Buegeleisen Book Sale The first session of the sale of fine books,^ Hebrew prayer books, Jewish publications,, Hebrew prayer shawls, etc., comprising the stock of 'the late H. D. Buegeleisen, at the; Anderson Galleries, Wed. aft., brought a total of $3,330.30. : The highest price, $216, was paid by ; George D. Smith for No. 130, "The Com-r plete Writings of Victor Hugo" (Phila., ;' n. d.), cabinet editionl, one of 100 copies. t Other items sold were: No. 70, "The Works of Charles Dickens," with the' Original series of illustrations by Cruikshank, "Phiz," etc. (Boston, 1EP2), 48 vols., Roxburgh edition.. Sm;:ith, $123. No. 63. "The Masterpieces of C. Paul' de Kock," translated by George Burnham Ives ( Phila., n. d.), 20 vols., limited editionl. Smith, $115. No. 11, "Antinue Gems," from the Greek and Latin. (Phila., n. d.), 13 vols., limited edition. Smith, $110. No. 81, "Romances," by Dumas (New. York, 1893 1894), 48 vols., Smith~ $105.' 'i No. 53, "The Writings of Mark Twain, (Hart [eord, 1899-1907), 25 vols., de luxe edition. J. P. 1 Horn & Co., $92.50 No 17A4, "The Complete Writings of Longfellow"9 (Poston, 1904), 11 vols., de luxe editionl, one of 750" :opies. Gabriel Wells, $85. No. 138, "Thte Works of Henrick Ibsen" (New s York, 1912), 16 vols., Viking edition, one of 256' rooies. J. P. IHorn & Co., $77. 50. Blackburne Collection Sale Old laces, textiles, petit point, quaint Englishl furniture, etc., assembled bv Ar- t ;hur Blackburne of London, sold at Cfarke's A\rt Rooms, Thurs., Fri. and Sat. afts. of ast week, brought a total of about $15,000.a No. 583, three XVII century settees, cov.y ~red with old point mosquere, went t _eone Ricci for $195. X No. 588, XVI century Spaniah carved chest, 36 in; ;14?/ x 55 in. -H. 0. Berg, $170. No. 591, pair XVI cenltury carvetd oak doors. J. W. 3axter, $160. - ' No. 600, Jacobean oak buffet, about 1650. Irving ' 'obb, $85.. i -.1 AM ER IC A NART NEWS9 I PAINTINGS BY American Artists I 2WILLIAM MACBETH 5Xx Incorporated | 450 Fifth Avenue - 40th Street - New York City 1:DANIEL GALLERY LA WSON Exhibition 2 West 47th Street THURBER ART GALLERIES American and Foreign Paintings . 75 EAST WAShINGTON STREET CHICAGO, ILL . Georges Hoentschel (1st Sale) , Works of Art, of Furniture and of Decoration, chiefly of the 18th Century. Oil Paintings-Sculptures, Pastel by Perronneau-Decorative Paintings. Works of Art of Extreme-Orient Bronzes, French Goldsmith's Art of the 18th Century. Remarkable series of Ancient -Seats. Beautiful carved wainscots of the 18th Century. Ancient Tapestries-Savonnerie Panels. Sale after death in Paris: Galerie Georges Petit, 8, Rue de Seze. on the 31st of M--,-,arch, Ist and 2nd of April. On view: 29th and 30th March, 1919. Auctioneer: Me. F. Lair-Dubreuil, 6, Rue Favart, Paris. Experts: For Woriks of Art-M. Paulme. -10, Rue Chauchat; M. G. Lasquin,- 11, Rue Grange-Bateliere; for Works of Extreme Orient-M. Andre Portier, 24, Rue Chauchat. BARON DENYS COCHIN'S COLLECTION MODERN PAINTINGS by Corot, Courbet. David, Degas, Delacroix, Goya, Manet, Puvis de Chavannes. Sale in Paris: GALERIE GEORGES PETIT, 8, Rue de Seze, on the 26th March, 1919. * On 'view: The 24th and 25th March, Auctioneer: Me. F. Lair Dubreuil, 6, Rue Favart, Paris. * Experts: M. M. Bernheim Jeune, 25 Boule vard de la Madeleine; M. M. Durand Ruel, 16. Rue Lafitte; M. A. Vollard, 28, Rue de ;- Grammont. ; Oriental Rugs> and Carpets Sale A collection of antique and modern rug arid carpets from Persia,. Asia Minor, th CGaucasus and China, sold at the Americat . Art Galleries, on the afts. of EIMar. 6, 7 and8 .brought a grand total of $137,700. ;The leading price, $7,100 was. paid b: Otto Bernet, agent, for No. 393, Persian .Kerman weave carpet, 35. ft x 18 ft. 2 ir .The second highest price, $5,600 was paiz *by P. W. French & Co. for No. 394, Persiai K horassan weave court carpet, 43 ft. 2 in. 18-ft. 10 in. - Other items sold were: No. 381, Persian Lavehr carpet, 22 by 15 ft. P. W French &c Co., $3,400. '-No. 383, Kashan court carpet. 21 by 13 ft. 9 in A.i C. Israel & Co., $2,600. *No. 392, Persian Ksshan court carpet, 33 ft. 2 in -by 12 ft. Costikyan & Co., $2,000. No. 265, XVIII century Chinese silk rug, 13 ft.-1 in '-by 6 ft. 4 in. P. W. French & Co., $1,990. - No. 390, Persian Kurdish carpet, 30 ft. by 13 f P. H. Costikyan. $1,600. No. 253, -Chinese Kang-shi rug, 11 ft. 8 in, by 6 2 in. D. G. Kelekian, $1,550. 'No. 313, XVI century Ispahan silkd velvet draper: --6 ft.'9 in. by 5 ft. 9 in. D. G. Kelekian, $1,550. ..No. 384, antinue Sarakh carpet, 21 ft. 10 in. b 12ft. 6 in. R. H. Lorenz, agt., $1,300. ~- No. 389, Persian Kurd carpet, 27 ft. 3 in. by 13 10 in. G. Towne. $1,250. *No. 261, Chinese Chien-lung rug, 8 ft. 6 in. by 5 f '3 in. N. M. Nicholls, $1,220. No. 370. Persian Yezd court carpet, 18 ft. by 14 f ' 4 in. P. W. French & Co., $1,200. ;No. 371, Persian Yezd court carpet, 17 ft. 6 in.b 14ft. 2 in., companion to preceding. P. W. French ; Co., $1,200. ' -No. 21 1, Persian Kerman carpet, 21 ft. by 14 f --E. A. Manning. $1,175. -No. 336, XVII century Indo-Ispaban rug. 12 f 7 in.by 9 ft. 9 in. R. H. Lorenz, agent, $1,125. N 1,P'ersian Kerman' carpet, 21 ft. 4 in. by 1 -ft. 4 in. E. A. Manning, $1,075. ' No. 363, Persian Kerman carpet, 15 ft. by 13 f 6 ni. Henry Lockhardt, Jr., $1,050. - Huntington- Americana Sale. Americana (Part X), from the library of Henry E. Huntington, sold at the Ander son Galleries, Thurs. eve., Mar. 6, brought $17,610.35, for the 241 items. George D. Smith paid $2,000, the highest price of the sale, for No 95, "The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques and Dis coveries of the English Nation," by Richard Haklvyt (London, 1599-1600), 3 vols., with rare Molineaux-Wright map and Bridge water bookplate. The second highest price, $1,810, was paid by the same buyer for No. 76, "The New Testament," by. John Eliot (Cam bridge, 1661), rare first edition in fine con dition. Other interesting items sold were: No. 223, a volume of four rare tracts on Virginia. New England, and Carolina, lettered "Historical Tracts," by John Lederer. Increase Mather andl Thomas Ash (London, 1672-82). Smith, $1,400. No. 53, "Virginia's- God be- Thanked," 'Charles Copland (Lon6on,:-1622), rare first edition, witl: Church bookplate. W. M. Hill, $1,010. No. 121, "Plain Dealing; or, Newes from New England," Thomas Lechford (London, 1642). rare first edition copy in good condition, from the Halsel library. Smith, $650. No. 129, "Ode Recited at the Commemorationi of the Living and Dead Soldiers of Harvard Univer sity," James Russell Lowvell (Cambridge, 1865). scarce first editioni with presenltationi incription by Lowell. Smith, $610. - No. 159, an anonymus document relating to the objection of the inlhabitants of the State of New York to being taxed for the support of the English govern ment (New York, 1713), with rare William Bradford imprint and Church bookplate. Rosenbaclh Co., $610. No. 106, "Descriptio ac delineatio Geographica De tectionis Freti," Henry Hudson (Amsterodami, 1613), rare, with Huth bookplate. L. C. Harper, $500. No. 18, "Silk Culture," John Bonoeil (London, 1622), rare first edition, and one of the earliest pub lications relating to the subject of silk culture; the Stevens-McKee-Churclh copy, with bookplate. Smith, $435. No. 130, "The History of the Late War in North America" (London, 1772), rare work, with all the maps; the Griswold-Brayton-Ives-Chturch copy, with bookplates of the last two. Smith, $405. No. 241, "The Strange and Delectable History of the discoverie anid Conquest of the Provinces of Peru, in the South Sea," Augustin de Zarate (London, 1581), first edition in English. Smith, $400. No. 133, "Vovages," Peter MIartyr (Paris, 1532), rare, the first collection of voyages printed in French; the Halsey copy. Smith, $325. No. 158, "New 'Netherlands," writteni by a Men nonite on behalf of some person, imploring h-s a-sist ance (1662), rare, with Hoe bookplate. L. C. Har per, $325. No. 82, "Voyages," Luke Foxe (London. 1635) rare original edition; the Thomas Harrison-Halse\ copy, with bookplate of the former. Smith, $310. No. 110, "Voyages," Thomas James (London, 1633) rare first edition, with E. D. Chu-ch bookplate Smith, $300. Hunter Japanese Prints Sale The Frederick W. Hunter Japanese collec tion, including prints, books and ivories sold at the Walpole Galleries, Wed. eve. brought a total of $14,229. The highest price, $975, was paid by Mr Osborn for No. 204, a Kiraraye or mica ground -print, by Sharaku, important. as ar association item. Another Kiraraye, by Sha raku, No. 200, went to Fukushima Co., foi $800. Other items sold were: No. 87, "Musume and Her Maid Leaving the Batl House," Harunobu. Fukushima Co.. $525. No. 83, Hosoye triptych, Kiyomitsu, Kiyotsunt Hlarunobu. Yamanaka Co., $400. No. 84, "The Flute Players," Harunobu. Fuku shima Co., $400. No. 108, Urushiye, or lacquer print. Kiyomasu L. V. Ledoux, $385. No. 202; "Actor," Sharaku. Yamanaka Co., $350 No. 64, "Great Wave of Kanagawa Inlet,"- Hoku sai. K. Matsuki, $325. No. 93, "Girl Welcoming Her Lover," diptycl Harunobu. Yamanaka Co., $200. Ames-Sterling Library Sale Early English literature, incunabula, library sets and Mss., including literary property of the late Gov. OliVer Ames of Massachusetts and the late John W. Ster ling of New York, were sold at the Ameri can Art Galleries this week. At the first session, Tue. aft., a total of $5,610.25 was realized for the 264 items - sold. No. 15, "American Statesmen," edited by John T. Morse, Jr. (Boston, 1898-1900), 32 vols. B. Harris $275. No. 188. "The Writings of John Burroughs" (Bos ton, 1895-1916), 19 vols. G. Wells, $180. No. 38, "The Iconography of Manhattan Island," I. N. Phelps Stokes (New York, 1915-6), 2 vols. E. D. North, $165. At the second session, Tue. eve., a total of $5,910.50 was obtained for the 265 items sold. No. 354, "Egypt and the Holy Land," David Rob erts (London, 1842-9). 6 vols. Henry Lockahdt, Ji., $290. No. 360, "Encyclopaedia Britannica" (Cambridge, 1910-1), 11th edition, 29 vols. Henry Lockhardt, Jr.. $265. No. 339, "Biblia Sacra Latina" (1462), -the first bible extant with date and printer's name. L. C. Harper, $260. No. 286, "The Works of Dickens- (London, 1873 1876), illustrated by George Cruikshank and others, 30 vols. James B. Rock, $255. At the third session, Wed. aft., the 264 items sold brought a total of $4,839.25. No: 604a, original MS. of Poe's "Hans Phaall" (1534-5), 20 pages. L. C. Harper, $770. No. 751. "The Writings of Henry David Thoreau' (Boston, 1896), 20 vols., MS. edition. A Swann. agt., $375. No. 729, "Lives of the Queens of England," Agnes Strickland (Phila., 1902-3), 16 vols., royal edition. limited to 39 copies. G. Wells, $200. No. 540. "The Work of Moliere" (Paris, 1773), 6 vols., illustrated copy of first issue. F. W. Morris, $140. At the fourth and concluding session Wed. eve., the 356 items sold brought a total of $1,317, making a grand total of $17,677 for the complete sale. WITH THE ARTISTS At her Sherwood studio Helen Watson Phelps has just completed a portrait of Mr. Stuart Henry, the author; a good piece of character work. She also painted recentIy an exceptionally fine head of Miss Leonara Smith, a vivacious subject. Gerome Brush has left his Sherwood studio and has gone to Palm Beach, Fla.. where he will be the guest of Mrs. H. C. Phipps, of whose two children he will make portrait busts. He will return in April. Harriett Phillips spent last summer and autumn at Westport, Conn., where she painted a number of outdoor subjects, fig ures and landscapes. Always a good painter, her work of late has greatly ad vanced. Harley Perkins, the Boston artist, was a recent guest at the National Arts Club. Carlt J. Blenner is painting an attractive 'portrait of Mrs. Barnes Newbury. .ESTABLISH ED 1900 ?heEhrich (alleries Dealers in 3affifttugs bp " Olb ;fflaoter" S 707 FIFTH AVE., at 55th St., NEW YORK IMPORTANT works of the _ "Old Masters" are to be = found in our galleries at all times. Notable and rare ex amples are constantly being acquired by us. Paintings purchased from us are always exchangeable at the full purchase price. ARLINGTON GALLERIES 274 Madison Avenue, bet. 39th & 40th Streets MODERN PAINTINGS Exhibition by American Autiata Every Fortnigh t During the Season ON VIEW Paintings Engravings, Auto graphs, Busts, Statuettes, etc. relative to AMERICAN HISTORY Bonaventure Galleries 601 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK near 48th Street WATER COLORS ByWM. RITSCHEL, N. A WATER CLORS By HENRY FERRER E. MULLERT G. SIGNORINI F. BALESIO R. Dudensing & Son 45 West Fifty-fourth St. (Between Fifth asnd OIL PAINTING-S Sixth Avenues EXHIBITION OF PAINTINGS and WATER COLORS by ALICE JUDSON and GEO. PEARSE ENNIS T8IROUGH MARCH at the HOTEL BOSSERT Hicks and Montague Streets BROOKLYN Sidney Dickinson, who spent some years teaching in the Minneapolis art school,.has returned to N. Y. to make it his permanent home. The work of this able painter has received so much praise from artists and critics within the past few years, that he doubtless will find a warm welcome in alli art circles. - Arthur Crisp is completing one of the largest Batik decorations ever attempted in this country, a commission from the Hotel' Dupont at Wilmington, Del.. where it will hang in the men's lounge. The size is. 16 x 9 and the sulbject is Oriental in design, tone and costumes, and is called "HosPi tality." He will hold an exhibition of re cent oils at the Whitney studios beginning' Feb. 25.___ Miss Emily Hatch gave a tea at her studio. 62 Washington Square,-last week, to show a recent portrait of Col. Roosevelt.. It is an unusually characteristic present ment, considered by his friends t?o be an ex cellent likeness and a good work of art as: well. W. C.. Emmerson has recently returned' from Chicago, where he held a successful exhibition of a group of landscapes. The' beautiful color and rare sentiment of th-is artist's work was so much appreciated in th5e Middle West that every canvas was sotd, and in consequence a club was formed callecli the "Emmersonians." Every new purchase-r may become a member. Happily for the artist the organization is growing. He has; taken a studio at 1947 Broadway where he will remain for the winter, and where some' excellent examples of his work may be seen. S. Mary Norton recently completed an excellent portrait of Martha McCullosli Williams, the *author, at her studio,. 1947' Broadway. The work is spiritual in expres sion, delicate in tone and in evfery way a pleasing canvas. EXHIBITIONS OPEN SUNDAYS 1-5 P. M. EXHIBITIONS AND SALES AT THE ANDERSON G ALLEIRIES PARK AVENUE & 59th STREET, NEW YORK r To be sold Thursday itight, March 20, at 8:15. 43 ORIGINAL DRAWINGS BY AUBREY BEARDSLEY THE_ FAMOUS COLLECTION OF FREDERICK H. EVANS OF LONDON These drawings were received by Mr. Evans direct from the artist, and their sale is an event. Beardsley originals are excessively rare and such an oppor tunity as the present cannot again occur. [ Also to be sold Thursday night, March 20, at S:15. 34 COLORED MEZZOTINTS THE COLLECTION OF MISS CAROLINE CHOATE y WITH OTHER COLLECTIONS t[ To be sold Fridayt ight, March 21, at 8 :15 MODERN ETCHINGS AND LITHOGRAPHS THE COLLECTION OF F|HAMILTON EASTER FIELD Etchings by Meryon, Whistler, Cameron, etc., and lithographs mostly by French artists of the 19th Century, Delacroix, Raffet, Fantin-Latour, Redon 4 and a complete set of "La Caricature." 10 AMERICAN ART NEWS LEWIS AND SIMMONS Rare Objects oiArt and Old Masters 605 Fifth Avenue NEW YORK LONDON-180 New Bond Street PARIS-16 Rue de la Paix * THEm - RALSON GALLERI S uGHCASSP S OF THI EARLYENGLISH 9 fainaS^hig L6T FIFTH AVENUE-NEW YORK AT 46th STREBT 718 FjfhJA~ 1X~~~~~~~1 C. & E. CANESSA iutnnqut Works of Jrt Paris: 125 Champ Elysoe \$ Naples: Piaz di Martiri t*n ~New York: 1iW"t 5OtbSt. Eatabliahed 1888 HENRY SCHULTHEIS CO. Modern Paintings etchings Color Prints Frames 142 FULTON ST.y 55t VESEY ST. SELIGMANN Works -of Art 23 Place Vendome, Pars Arnold Seligmann, Rey & Co. Incorporated 7 W. 36th SLe New York R.O.& N. M.VOSEI ESTABLISHED IN 1841 HIGH CLASS PAINTINGS EARLY ENGLISH BARBIZON AMERICAN MODERN DUTCH BOSTON 398 BOYLSTON STRZZKT YOUNG GALLEPIES <IRportacti Erxarles by AMEPICAN IMuIIIIIUIIUIBhItll a nL d IWlflhJl JHlhmllllxll FOPEIGM MASTERS 620 Fifth Xvernue between 190.O 50 S{reefs | lNew YorkL 000 N. E. MONTROSS Works of Art MONTROSS GALLERY 550 FIFTH AVE. NEW YORK ACKE RMANN Sporting Paintings Rare Prints New York - - 10 East 46th Street Chicago 620 South Michigan Avenue PROSPER GUERRY Studios: 360 W. 55th St. New York Paintings Restored QUALITY OF WORK UNSURPASSED J ]OHN LEVY]I HIGH CLASS PAINTINGS 14 EAST 46th STREET OPPOSITE THE RIUTZ-CARLTON Scott & Fowles ART GALLERIES 590 Fifth Avenue Between 47th and 48th Streets NEW YORK T'H E Folsom Galleries 560 Fifth Avenue (Dreicer Building) NEW YORK AMERICAN PAINTINGS Rare Persian Faience DREYFOUS 582 FIFTH AVE. NEW YORK Antique and Modern WORKS OF ART Furniture, Enamels, China, PARIS Fine Leather Goods, Etc. LONDON E. C. BABCOCK Successor to Snedecor & Co. Established by John Snedecor in 1852 Fine Quality Paintings 1v EAST 49th STREET NEW YORK FRANK PARTRIDGE Old English Furniture Antique Chinese Porcelains & WQRKS OF ART 741 FIFTH AVE. NEW YORK 26 King St., St. James', London Robert B. Mussmann T\ !he FINER FRAMEES Mezzotints-Etchings-Mrrors . it 0B JEBC T S of AR T . <Utbi'144 WEST 57th STREET W ~~Telephone 208 Circle - NEDW YORK ROBERT HYMAN Foreign and American Paintings Bronzes and Objects of Art 8 WEST 45TH ST. NEWV YORK To the Trade a Specialty F.Kiejuberger Galleries, Inc X ~725 Fifth-Avenue | ~New YorkN 9 Rue de l'Echelle fiAncient Paintings Specialty Primitives 30 ~~~of ali Schools 0 ~Old Dutch Masters JACQUES: SELIGMANNt 57 Rue St. Dominique (Ancien Palsis Sagan) PARIS Jacques Seligmann & Co INC. 705 Fifth Avenue NEW YORK Young's Art Gallenres - Atrrtain tifitfi jv Art Notes and notices of current . exhibitions mailed on request 3 + 66 East Jackson Boulevard ;{ CHICAGO - Satinover Galleries I M P OL R T E R S O F Selected Old Masters : 27 West 56th Street - New York Arthur Tooth & Sons., Established 1842 High Class Paintings London: 155 New Bond Street - Paris: 41 Boulevard des Capucines oUlanb 4OaUerieo .7 (Established 1I5NS ] American and Foreign Paintings 500 FIFrH AVENUE, NEW YORK 4 L ~~~N. W. C-r. 42nd St.J KELEKIAN Objets de Collection-S 709 FIFTH AVENUE - NEW YORB - 2 PLACE VENDOME - - .PARIS. 38 KASR-EL-NIL - - - CAIRO * London Kyoto - Osaka - ex Bostoni. Peking Shanghai YAMAN.AKA & CO. 680 Fifth Avenue - NEW YORK X WOR KS OF ART - - FROM JAPAN AND CH INA In writing to advertisers please mention the AMERICAN ART NEWS