The FASEB Journal • Editorial
Quorum Sensing on the Airbus Wing:
Margaret Fuller and Prince Kropotkin
Scrambling for the exits and carrying the helpless, they perched
ankle- and then knee-deep atop the wings as an improvised
armada of tour boats and ferries streamed to their rescue
. . . witnesses described a scene of level-headed teamwork to
rescue the weak and infirm.
—The Washington Post, January 16, 2009 (1)
We at once see that those animals which acquire habits of
mutual aid are undoubtedly the fittest . . . we may safely say
that mutual aid is as much a law of animal life as mutual
struggle but that, as a factor of evolution it most probably has
a far greater importance.
—Prince Pyotr Kropotkin, 1902 (2)
Bacteria communicate extensively with each other and employ a
communal approach to facilitate survival in hostile environments.
—Shadaba Asad and Steven M. Opal, 2008 (3)
MUTUAL AID AND QUORUM SENSING
The masterful ditching in the Hudson River on January
15 of US Airways Flight 1549 and the rescue of all its
155 passengers provided high drama on a cold winter
day. That “Miracle on the Hudson” preoccupied national
television from the start and produced a real-life
aviation hero, Captain Chesley Sullenberger. It also
evoked a behavioral response that a century ago was
called “mutual aid” by Prince Kropotkin (2) and nowadays
would be described “quorum-sensing” by micro-
biologists (3).
Within minutes after the plane alighted safely on the
frigid Hudson, hatches opened and passengers, guided
by attendants, emerged in orderly fashion through the
emergency exits. “Some passengers began to wail, but
witnesses described a scene of level-headed teamwork
to rescue the weak and infirm . . . (1)” The Airbus
remained adrift and partially submerged in the ice-cold
water. Groups of passengers spread out on both wings
of the jetliner; then as dry space on the wings gave out,
a few moved to rafts. Within minutes, the drifting
Airbus was surrounded by ferry and sightseeing boats,
then by police vessels, fireboats, tugboats, and Coast
Guard craft. Their crews tossed life rings and pulled the
passengers to safety, their prows held the plane in place
against the current. Helicopters brought wet-suited
Passengers from Airbus 320 being rescued from the icy Hudson River; New York City, January 15, 2009. Image courtesy Corbis.
9730892-6638/09/0023-0973 © FASEB
 police divers, who dropped into the water to help with
the rescue.
We’d call that kind of response mutual aid, for sure.
But, what about that optimal clustering of folk on the
teetering wing, that biofilm of rescue rigs in the water,
that bobbing flotilla of vessels securing the plane, the
airways abuzz with signals of distress and rescue? Why
that sounds a lot like “quorum sensing” (4) an evolutionary
strategy used by microbes to effect a “coordi-
nated population response . . . explaining both cooperation
and communication (5).”
LET THEM BE SEA CAPTAINS IF THEY WILL
Another theme emerged: among the first ferry captains
to arrive at the scene was Brittany Catanzaro, the 20
year-old Captain of the New York Waterways Ferry,
Thomas Kean. It occurred to me that the drama of the
Airbus on the Hudson was a prima facie argument for
the equal rights amendment. Brittany Catanzaro and
her crew plucked 24 passengers from the ditched flight
to safety. “I’ve been on the water since I was 2 years
old,” the Captain told The New York Times “I pulled out
of Pier 79, I looked for any kind of southbound traffic,
and I saw the plane there . . . It was hard to stay next to
it, but you practice that by throwing life rings in the
water and trying to stay alongside them (6).”
The pioneering American feminist, Margaret Fuller,
would have been proud. Fuller, who served Horace
Greely as America’s first female foreign correspondent,
argued for women’s equality in the moral, social, and
occupational spheres. Her 1845 work, Woman in the
Nineteenth Century, anticipated Captain Catanzaro’s feat
by over a century and a half:
But if you ask me what offices they may fill, I reply—any.
I do not care what case you put; let them be sea captains
if they will. I do not doubt there are women fitted for such
an office . . . (7)
Neither would Fuller have doubted the fitness of
Sheila Dale, Donna Dent, and Doreen Welsh, the three
veteran flight attendants who safely guided the passengers
from seat, to hatch, to wing, to shore. Each was
over 50 years old and retained her job thanks to legal
action taken by Eulalie Cooper, a flight attendant who
in the sex-kitten days of the 60’s was fired by Delta Air
Lines for being married. (8, 9)
Fuller ranked among our nation’s leading literary
figures in the ante-bellum period; she had edited The
Dial with Ralph Waldo Emerson and became a cultural
critic for the New York Tribune (10). She shared the
meliorist convictions of the Brooke Farm transcendentalists
who, half a century before Prince Kropotkin,
believed that mutual aid was a human obligation:
With simultaneous vibration the hearts of all their circle
acknowledged the divine obligation of love and mutual
aid between human beings. Food, clothing, medicine were
all offered freely . . . (11)
In the course of her foreign adventures, she married
the Marquis Ossoli, an Italian patriot who fought
Brittany Catanzaro (1989–), captain of the Thomas Kean.
Image courtesy Associated Press.
Margaret Fuller (1810–1850), passenger on The Elizabeth.
Photograph  2009 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.
974 Vol. 23 April 2009 WEISSMANNThe FASEB Journal
 bravely on the barricades for the Roman Republic
against the royalist-papal armies of France and Austria
during the Revolution of 1848 –1849. Fuller freed
herself to work day and night as a volunteer nurse in
the Tiber Island hospitals. In those bloody field
stations, as a posthumous account had it, “the
weather was intensely hot; her health was feeble and
delicate; the dead and dying were around her in
every stage of pain (12).”
Ironically, Fuller died less than five years after her sea
captain plea, because of the unfitness of a male sea
captain in waters around New York. On July 19, 1850,
Margaret Fuller, her husband, and infant son were
drowned in a shipwreck on her return voyage from the
Italian wars. An inexperienced first mate had run the
merchantman Elizabeth aground on a sandbar off Fire
Island and her body was never recovered. Days later,
her old friend Henry David Thoreau wandered the
sands looking for remnants of the Ossolis, but nothing
had washed ashore (10). If only the Elizabeth had been
tended to by a sea captain as professional as Brittany
Catanzaro!
AN ANARCHIST EDITOR OF NATURE
Prince Pyotr Kropotkin (1842–1921), who fathered the
principle of “Mutual Aid”, was no mean feminist himself.
He had taunted his Czar, Alexander II, who in turn
had him imprisoned before the prince found refuge in
England at the end of the century:
In spite of the open hatred of Alexander II for educated
women,—when he met in his walks a girl wearing
spectacles and a round Garibaldian cap, he began to
tremble, thinking that she must be a nihilist bent on
shooting at him; in spite of the bitter opposition of the
state police, who represented every woman student as a
revolutionist; in spite of the thunders and the vile
accusations . . . there are now in Russia more than six
hundred and seventy women practicing as physicians
(13).
The Prince, a natural scientist who had served as
secretary of the Russian Geographical Society, arrived
in London in 1886 and soon called at the offices of
Nature, his favorite journal. He was “most cordially
received” by a sub-editor, Mr. J. Scott Keltie, who was
looking to increase the journal’s international coverage.
Kropotkin, working under the exile’s pseudonym
of Levashóff, showed the approving Keltie a few samples
of his writing and soon the anarchist prince was
given a table in the office of Nature and asked to review
foreign publications and books. The multilingual
Prince performed these editorial duties flawlessly until
“One day, however, Mr. Keltie took from the shelves
several Russian books, asking me to review them for
Nature. I looked at the books, and, to my embarrassment,
saw that they were my own works on the ‘Glacial
Period’ and the ‘Orography of Asia’ (14).
Kropotkin confessed that he could not comply with
this request and admitted the works were his own. His
cover was blown and the prince retired from Nature. He
went on to edit the British anarchist magazine Freedom,
the motto of which remains a tribute to his politics—
and his evolutionary theory: “Anarchists work towards a
society of mutual aid and voluntary co-operation (15).”
In his Memoirs of a Revolutionist (1899), the Prince
complained that the Darwinian struggle for existence
had been misinterpreted in the biological as well as the
social realm. He cried that “there is no infamy in
civilized society, or in the relations of the whites towards
the so-called lower races that has not been
excused by the Darwinian ’struggle for existence’ (16).”
Kropotkin—who would have been thrilled by that
Airbus on the Hudson—was the first to draw attention
to “mutualism” in animal behavior, a notion based on
his field observations in Siberia. For him the rabbit was
the very model of the social animal; its persistence—
and capacity for mass production—was an argument
against the dog-eat-dog world of popular (social) Darwinism.
The rabbit, he told his friend Ford Madox Ford,
stood out against the fiercer aspects of selection. Defenseless
and adapted for nothing in particular, it had
outlived “the pterodactyl, the Hyrcanian tiger and the
lion of Numidia (17).” One wonders how he would
have described those Canada geese that brought down
the Airbus. He’d probably bet that the Canada goose
will go on to outlive the Airbus—and Boeing for that
matter—as it has outlived the Concorde, the Lockheed,
and the DC 3.
Prince Pyotr Kropotkin (1846–1921). Image courtesy Corbis.
975EDITORIAL: QUORUM SENSING ON THE AIRBUS WING
 Anticipating E. O. Wilson, Kropotkin proposed mutual
aid as a force in natural selection which ensured
that group survival need not depend a Hobbesian
struggle between the weak and the strong. The Prince
was neither a fan of intelligent design, nor an ecosentimentalist:
if mutual aid gave a species selective
advantage, it had nothing to do with “love:”
It is not love, and not even sympathy (understood in its
proper sense) which induces a herd of ruminants or of
horses to form a ring in order to resist an attack of wolves;
not love which induces wolves to form a pack for hunting;
not love which induces kittens or lambs to play, or a dozen
of species of young birds to spend their days together in the
autumn; and it is neither love nor personal sympathy
which induces many thousand fallow-deer scattered over
a territory as large as France to form into a score of
separate herds, all marching towards a given spot, in
order to cross there a river. It is a feeling infinitely wider
than love or personal sympathy—an instinct that has
been slowly developed among animals and men in the
course of an extremely long evolution, and which has
taught animals and men alike the force they can borrow
from the practice of mutual aid and support, and the joys
they can find in social life. (18)
H.W. Bates, the father of behavioral genetics, called
Kropotkin the truest Darwinist: mutual aid was a law of
nature on a par with Darwin’s “group selection (16).”
But in those days before gene and DNA, neither
Kropotkin nor Darwin had a clue as to the biological
underpinnings of fitness or natural selection. How
could generations of wild horses know exactly how
many of them were needed to form a circle against
wolves? How exactly did an “extremely long evolution”
work out the optimum number of Canada geese required
to fly in almost radar-perfect V-formation (19)?
Nowadays we turn to molecular and behavioral genetics
for answers to such questions, some of which will likely
be based on what we’ve learned of “quorum sensing” in
microbes.
THE VIBRIO, THE SQUID, AND THE QUORUM
“Quorum sensing” was introduced in 1994 by Fuqua et
al. to explain mutualism between a bioluminescent
marine bacterium, Vibrio fischeri and the Hawaiian bobtail
squid, Euprymna scolopes (4). Both benefit from
cohabitation: the bacteria are nourished by nutrients
from the squid and the squid gains a unique mating
advantage from the vibrio. From early in their development,
the squid take up the vibrios which become
concentrated in light organs distributed along the body
of the cephalopod (20). When a sufficient number of
vibrios accumulate in these organs, the colony senses
that it’s time to generate light by turning on luciferase
genes:
. . . certain bacterial behaviors can be performed efficiently
only by a sufficiently large population of bacteria.
We describe this minimum behavioral unit as a quorum
of bacteria (4).
Mutualism between vibrio and squid serves to
generate what J. W. (Woody) Hastings of Harvard
and the MBL has called “Light to Hide By (21).” The
bobtail squid perform their habitual mating rituals at
the ocean surface on moonlit nights, but the downdwelling
light makes their amorous silhouettes visible
to predators from below. Microbial luminescence to
the rescue! As the vibrios set the light organs of the
squid aglitter, their undersides become invisible
from below (22). “La mer est le ciel des poissons,” as
Cocteau had it.
Vibrios know that there are enough of them to
light up the sky by means of quorum-sensing, (QS)
molecules. These were first identified as members of
an N-acyl homoserine lactone (AHL) family, but
further studies of both gram-positive and gram-negative
bacteria found that a vast number of microbes
secrete a variety of QS molecules. By now, not only
AHLs, but also 2-alkyl-4(1H)-quinolones (AHQs),
cyclic di-peptides, autoinducer-2 (AI-2) and small
modified peptides have been identified as signals of
microbial mutual aid (23, 24). As might be expected
in our new RNA world, Bonnie Bassler at Princeton
has recently shown that a small RNA chaperone
protein (Hfq), acting with multiple small regulatory
RNAs (sRNAs) functions as “an ultrasensitive regulatory
switch that controls the critical transition into
and out of quorum sensing mode (25).”
Quorum-sensing molecules launch signaling cascades
that cross bacterial species, cut across king-
doms, and can serve both benign and pathogenic
functions in human disease. Quorum sensing and its
extension, the formation of biofilms, have been used
to explain human ailments that range from systemic
sepsis, to cystic fibrosis, sinusitis, airway infections,
and even gum disease. Interference with quorum
sensing is therefore the next logical step on the way
to new antimicrobials (3, 23). Bassler and Losick
pointed out that studies of microbial quorum sensing
have revealed a new world of “long- and short-range
chemical signaling channels; one-way, two-way, and
multi-way communication; contact-mediated and
contact-inhibited signaling; and the use and spread
of misinformation or, more dramatically, even deadly
information (25). They could have been describing
signals that did—and mercifully didn’t—fill the airways
on January 15 when that Airbus splashed down
in the Hudson.
A final note. On February 9, 2009, Mayor
Bloomberg presented keys to New York City to Captain
Sullenberger and his crew, who in turn paid
tribute to all those, including Captain Brittany Cantazaro,
who plucked crew and passengers from the icy
Hudson—a story of mutual aid that would have made
Kropotkin proud. On April 3, 2009, Bonnie Bassler
was awarded the prestigious Wiley Prize at Rockefeller
University for her “pioneering investigations
into quorum sensing, a mechanism that allows bacteria
to ’talk’ to one another with chemical languages
976 Vol. 23 April 2009 WEISSMANNThe FASEB Journal
 (26).” Margaret Fuller would have been proud—not
only of her sea captain.
Gerald Weissmann
Editor-in-Chief
doi: 10.1096/fj.09-0401ufm
Margaret Fuller image notes: Southworth and Hawes, American,
19th Century; After: John Plumbe, American (born in
Wales), 1809–1857; Margaret Fuller, 1850–55; Photograph,
daguerreotype; Plate: 10.8  8.3 cm (41⁄4  31⁄4 in.); Museum
of Fine Arts, Boston; Gift of Edward Southworth Hawes in
memory of his father Josiah Johnson Hawes, 43.1412.
REFERENCES
1. Gellman, B., and Shulman R. (January 16, 2009) All Survive Jet’s
Splashdown in Hudson River; Airbus Carrying 155 People Apparently
Hit Geese Minutes After Takeoff From New York. The
Washington Post p. A01
2. Kropotkin, P. (1902) Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution 1972
edition: New York University Press, New York. p.13
3. Asad, S., and Opal, S. M. (2008) Bench to Bedside Review:
Quorum sensing and the role of cell-to-cell communication
during invasive bacterial infection. Crit. Care 12, 236 [Epub.
ahead of print]
4. Fuqua, W. C., Winans, S. C., and Greenberg, E. P. (1994)
Quorum sensing in bacteria: the LuxR-LuxI family of cell densityresponsive
transcriptional regulators. J. Bacteriol. 176, 269–267
5. Diggle, SP, Gardner, A., West, S. A., and Griffin, A. S. (2007)
Evolutionary theory of bacterial quorum sensing: when is a signal
not a signal? Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 362, 1241–
1249
6. Dwyer, J. (January 17, 2009) Old Hands on the River Didn’t Have
to Be Told What to Do. The New York Times p. A19
7. Fuller, M. (1845) Woman in the Nineteenth Century. 1855 edition: J.
J Jewett, Boston. p. 174
8. Collins, G. (January 28, 2009) Lilly’s Big Day. The New York Times
p. A27
9. Leocha, C. (January 20, 2009) Unsung heroes on the Hudson—
flight attendants on US Airways 1549. Tripso.com http://www.
tripso.com/today/unsung-heroes-on-the-hudson-flightattendants-on-us-airways-1549/.
Accessed February 2009
10. Wade, M. (1940) Margaret Fuller: Whetstone of Genius. Viking Press,
New York. p. 139 ff
11. Fuller, p. 253
12. Fuller, (1855 edition only) p. 390
13. Kropotkin, P. (1899) Memoirs of a Revolutionist. Houghton, Mifflin,
Boston and New York. p. 260
14. ibid. p. 381
15. The Freedom Press. http://www.freedompress.org.uk/public/
news.oml.html. Accessed February 2009
16. Kropotkin, P. Memoirs, p. 49
17. Ford, F. M. (1971) Memories and Impressions. In: The Bodley
Head Ford Madox Ford. Bodley Head, London. Vol. 5, p. 190
18. Kropotkin, Mutual Aid. p. 4
19. Williams, T. C., Klonowski, T. J., and Berkeley, P. (1976) Angle of
Canada Goose flight formation measured by radar. The Auk 93,
554–559
20. McFall-Ngai, M. J., and Ruby, E. G. (1991) Symbiont recognition
and subsequent morphogenesis as early events in an animalbacterial
mutualism. Science. 254, 1491–1494
21. Hastings, J. W. (1971) Light to hide by: ventral luminescence to
camouflage the silhouette. Science 173, 1016–1017
22. Jones, B. W., and Nishiguchi, M. K. (2004) Counterillumination
in the Hawaiian bobtail squid, Euprymna scolopes. Marine Biology
144, 1151–1155
23. Popat, R., Crusz, S. A., Diggle, S. P. (2008) The social behaviours
of bacterial pathogens. Brit. Med Bulletin 87, 63–75
24. Novick R. P., and Geisinger E. (2007) Quorum sensing in
staphylococci. Annu. Rev. Genet. 42, 541–564
25. Bassler, B. L., and Losick, R. (2006) Bacterially speaking. Cell 125,
237–246
26. MacPherson, K. (February 3, 2009) Bassler wins Wiley Prize in
Biomedical Sciences. News at Princeton http://www.princeton.
edu/main/news/archive/S23/37/03S23/index.xml?section
topstories Accessed February 2009
The opinions expressed in editorials, essays, letters to the editor, and other articles comprising the Up Front section are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the opinions of FASEB or its constituent societies. The FASEB Journal welcomes all points of view and many voices.
We look forward to hearing these in the form of op-ed pieces and/or letters from its readers addressed to journals@faseb.org.
977EDITORIAL: QUORUM SENSING ON THE AIRBUS WING
