AmericAn Society of Agronomy | crop Science Society of AmericA | Soil Science Society of AmericA  
NewsDecember 2007 V52 N12
www.agronomy.org • www.crops.org • www.soils.org
crops, soils, AgroNomy
CSA
 ©Copyright 2007 Regent Instruments Inc. All Rights Reserved. Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation.
More details at www.regentinstruments.com
REGENT INSTRUMENTS INC., CANADA
Image Analysis Systems for Plant Science
Based on High Resolution Scanners and Digital Cameras 
For PC computers with Windows 98, NT, 2000, ME, XP or Vista
Seed and needle morphological and color 
analysis, classification, diseased area, 
object count,... 
WinSEEDLE™
Tree-ring measurement with adjustable 
sensitivity, cross-dating, wood density 
measurement, stem analysis,...
WinDENDRO™
Anatomical analysis and quantification 
of wood-cell structure parameters over 
annual rings 
WinCELL™
Leaf area, morphological analysis, diseased 
area, pest damage, foliar disk analysis,...
WinFOLIA™
Morphology, architecture and topology of roots in 
minirhizotron and soil. Compatible with most imaging 
acquisition devices for root growth monitoring in soil.
WinRHIZO™ Tron 
Root morphology, link, topology and architecture. Other measurements include 
diseased roots, thin lateral vs. main roots, roots in growth pouch, seedling 
leaf area in Petri dish, seeds germination, mycorrhizal surface area,...
WinRHIZO™
Regent-ASA-Aug2007.indd   1 8/24/07   2:31:21 PM
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 1
reseArch & iNDustry
society & policy News
cAreer & eDucAtioN
Society Science                        2
Uncovering the challenges of watering plants in space. Plus, nitrogen
fertilizers deplete soil organic carbon, biofuel feedstock 
supply is limited by soil organic matter concerns, infiltrometer 
size affects reliability of measured soil hydraulic conductivity, and 
gene interaction is found to be a reason for long-term response to 
selection.
Research Roundup                        9
A new report by the National Research Council says that an increase
in ethanol production from corn could significantly impact 
water quality and availability. Plus, the new science of metagenomics
may revolutionize understanding of microbes, and a 
food-processing technique extends shelf life of fresh foods without 
additives.
SSSA Past President’s Message                14
Back to the future.
Chief Executive Officer’s Message                15
Thank you members and staff for a successful 2007!
Science Policy News                16
Farm bill finally on the move in the Senate.
Education                26
Learning exercise brings land managers and scientists together to 
discuss management and climate issues.
Early Career Members                27
The road not taken.
Job Listings                28
Certification                37
Certification explained.
Student & Career Activities                            38
Applications are being accepted for 2008 scholarships and awards.
In Memoriam                19
Business & People                20
Membership                22
Letter to the Editor                23
Promoting a modern image of soil science.
Calendar                24
CSA News (www.agronomy.org/csa-news) is the official 
monthly magazine for members of the American Society 
of Agronomy (ASA), Crop Science Society of America 
(CSSA), and Soil Science Society of America (SSSA).
presiDeNts
ASA: Kenneth J. Moore 
CSSA: William J. Wiebold 
SSSA: Gary A. Peterson 
chief executiVe officer
Ellen G.M. Bergfeld
eDitoriAl
Editors-in-Chief: Ken Barbarick (ASA), Craig Roberts 
(CSSA), and Sally Logsdon (SSSA)
Director of Publications: Fran Katz (fkatz@agronomy.org 
or 608-268-4974)
Managing Editor: Matt Nilsson (news@agronomy.org or 
608-268-4968)
Member News Editor: Sara Uttech (membernews@
agronomy.org or 608-268-4948)
Production Assistants: Liz Gebhardt and Meg Ipsen
ADVertisiNg
Display ads: Alexander Barton (abarton@2bartons.com 
or 847-698-5069)
Job listings: Melissa Fall (jobs@agronomy.org or 608273-8080
correspoNDeNce
CSA News welcomes letters, comments, and contributions 
from members, published on a space-available basis and 
subject to editing. The deadline is the first of the month 
preceding publication (e.g., 1 January for the February 
issue). Address correspondence or questions to:
CSA News, 677 S. Segoe Rd.
Madison, WI 53711-1086
608-268-4968 or news@agronomy.org
For inquiries not directly related to CSA News, call 608273-8080
or email headquarters@agronomy.org.
postAge/subscriptioNs
CSA News (USPS 009740, ISSN 1529-9163) is published 
monthly by the American Society of Agronomy, Crop 
Science Society of America, and Soil Science Society of 
America. Periodical postage paid at Madison, WI and 
additional mailing offices. POSTMASTER: Send address 
change to CSA News, 677 S. Segoe Rd., Madison WI 537111086.
Nonmember subscriptions are $25/year (U.S.) and 
$75/year (international). See www.agronomy.org/ 
csa-news.
The views in CSA News do not necessarily reflect an 
endorsement by the publishers. To simplify information, 
CSA News may use trade names of some products. No 
endorsement of these products is intended, nor is any 
criticism implied of similar products not mentioned. 
crops, soils, AgroNomy
CSANews AmericAn Society of Agronomy crop Science Society of AmericA  Soil Science Society of AmericA 
Cover: Plants are an 
integral piece of future 
space exploration, providing
food, oxygen, and 
psychological balance 
for astronauts. In trying 
to grow plants in space, 
researchers discovered 
that plant growth was 
stunned by reduced gas 
exchange rates to the 
roots. In the November 
issue of Vadose Zone Journal,
researchers address 
the problem of watering 
plants in the absence 
of gravity. See story on 
page 2. Photos courtesy 
of NASA and USDANRCS.
Cover Design: Pat 
sCullion.
The Region 5 Soil Judging Contest was recently held in southwestern Iowa. Pictured 
here is the first-place group-judging team from the University of Minnesota (l to r): 
Terry Cooper (coach), Nick Reep, Erin Andrews, Meryl Larson, and Nick Saumweber.
See story on page 39.
December 2007 V52 N12
 Society Science
2 CSA News V52 N12 December 2007
re
se
A
rc
h
 &
 iN
D
u
st
ry
Plants are an integral piece of future space exploration, pro-viding food, oxygen, and psychological
balance for astronauts. 
In trying to grow plants in space, 
researchers discovered that plant 
growth was stunted by reduced gas 
exchange rates to the roots. This 
happens on earth when plants are 
overwatered and roots become waterlogged.
Under these conditions, 
roots can no longer exchange gases 
for respiration with the atmosphere 
as water blocks continuous air pathways.
While potting soils on earth 
have been chosen to drain under 
earth’s gravity, thereby avoiding 
water logging, under weightlessness
conditions like those on the 
International Space Station, capillary
forces retain water much like 
TOP LEFT: Researchers Scott Jones 
(left) and Robert Heinse (right) monitor
experiments in parabolic flight 
on NASA’s C-9 aircraft. Conducting 
experiments in flight is no easy task; 
imagine trying to work during a roller 
coaster ride. BOTTOM LEFT: The 
series of images shows the wetting 
front advance in the absence of gravity
leaving behind dry particles and 
entrapped air resulting in a destabilization
of the wetting front without 
the draining effect of gravity. ABOVE: 
Phase entrapment in a micromodel 
containing two coarse particle regions 
(glass bead size of 2.4 mm) surrounded
by finer-textured glass beads (0.9 
mm). The series of images reflect flow 
behavior under cyclic gravitational 
conditions and the preferential flow in 
the finer pore space bypassing coarse 
inclusion and leading to air entrapment
during imbibitions in the ab-
sence of gravity.
 r
eseA
rc
h &
 iN
D
u
stry
December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 
in a sponge. Therefore, maintaining 
plant health in the reduced-gravity
environment requires new ap-
proaches to manage water and air 
in the root zone.
Watering plants in the absence of 
gravity is an enticing challenge that 
researchers at Utah State University 
in cooperation with the University 
of Arizona, the Universities Space 
Research Association, and the Ecole 
Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne
in Switzerland are trying to 
address. The NASA-funded study 
applied principles of soil physics to 
understand the effects of reduced 
gravity on water in potting media. 
Results from the study are published
in the November issue of the 
Vadose Zone Journal.
The pressing question is how 
does water configure itself in 
porous media without the draining
effect of gravity? Parabolic 
flights aboard NASA’s C-9 aircraft 
provided 20-second snapshots of 
reduced gravity. These brief snapshots
enabled the measurement 
of the energy of water held in the 
porous media over a range of water 
contents. This key property, known 
as the soil-water retention function, 
provides a basis for the controlled 
watering of plants. 
The study demonstrated similar 
water retention functions and hydraulic
conductivities in reduced 
gravity when compared to earthbased
results, which bodes well for 
applying earth-based porous media 
hydraulic models. However, more 
detailed measurements revealed an 
unexpected distribution of water. 
Robert Heinse and Scott Jones, who 
conducted the experiments, say this 
discovery suggests that highly localized
nonuniform water contents 
may arise during the addition or 
removal of water, which may lead 
to potential problems with the oxygen
supply to plants. According to 
the researchers, this phenomenon 
is a result of hysteresis inherent in 
the soil-water retention function, 
and further study is needed to determine
the extent and longevity of 
this phenomena.
Research is ongoing at Utah State 
University in conjunction with the 
Space Dynamics Laboratory to investigate
the distribution of water 
in microgravity on the International 
Space Station. Scientists are currently
watching the progress of an 
experiment on the International 
Space Station conducted together 
with Russian scientists. Their efforts
will facilitate the design of 
root modules for vigorous and reliable
plant growth in space and for 
future manned travel to the Moon 
and Mars.
Heinse, R., S.B. Jones, S.L. Steinberg, 
M. Tuller, and D. Or. 2007. Measurements
and modeling of variable gravity 
effects on water distribution and flow 
in unsaturated porous media. Vadose 
Zone J. 6:713–724. View the full article 
online at http://vzj.scijournals.org/ 
content/vol6/issue4/
  CSA News V52 N12 December 2007 
re
se
A
rc
h
 &
 iN
D
u
st
ry
The modern era of corn pro-duction began more than 50 years ago, with a shift from the 
homegrown nitrogen of traditional 
legume rotations to a chemical alternative
made possible by a growing 
supply of inexpensive nitrogen fertilizers.
Besides increasing yield, this 
new strategy was expected to reverse 
the decline in soil organic matter 
(consisting primarily of carbon) by 
increasing residue inputs. Such a decline
had been a common occurrence 
throughout the Corn Belt since the 
sod was broken in the mid-19th century
and had become a major concern 
because of the negative impact on 
yield. The consequences are no less 
serious for agricultural sustainability 
and air and water quality.
The paradigm that nitrogen fertilizers
build soil organic carbon has 
been widely promulgated and should 
be easy to verify by comparing organic
carbon changes over time for sites 
with a history of nitrogen fertilization. 
One such site with historic significance
is the Morrow Plots, America’s 
oldest experiment field. Through the 
foresighted efforts of previous generations,
soil samples were collected and 
preserved to check how management 
practices have affected soil properties.
These samples were indispens-
able in a long-term assessment of the 
effects of nitrogen fertilization on soil 
organic carbon recently conducted by 
four soil scientists in the Department 
of Natural Resources and Environmental
Sciences at the University of 
Illinois. Results of the study appear in 
the November–December issue of the 
Journal of Environmental Quality.
The scientists analyzed profile 
samples for soil organic carbon to 
identify changes that have occurred 
since the onset of synthetic nitrogen 
fertilization in 1955. After five decades
of massive inputs of residue 
carbon (203–276 Mg ha–1) and fertilizer
nitrogen (4.1–10.8 Mg ha–1), all of 
the residue carbon had disappeared. 
More importantly, there had been a 
net decrease in soil organic carbon 
that averaged 3.4 Mg ha–1. Regardless 
of rotation, the decline became much 
more serious when corn was fertilized
with 336 kg N ha–1 on plots with 
a long-term history of manuring.
Saeed Khan, lead author of the 
study, is troubled by the implications 
of these findings for corn production,
because of the widespread use 
of yield-based nitrogen recommendations
since the 1970s. He says with 
these recommendations, a “one-sizefits-all”
approach that was intended 
to minimize the risk of nitrogen deficiency
as insurance for high yields 
came into use. Unfortunately, the 
usual result is overfertilization beStudy
Reveals that Nitrogen 
Fertilizers Deplete Soil Organic 
Carbon
Morrow Plots on the University of Illinois campus. Winter wheat, corn, and soybeans are shown. Photo by David Riecks.
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 5
r
eseA
rc
h &
 iN
D
u
stry
cause of the assumption that the fertilizer
supplies more nitrogen than 
the soil. 
“The opposite is true in most cases, 
and especially for the highly productive
soils of the Corn Belt that receive 
the highest nitrogen rates,” notes 
Khan. “The rates have been progressively
inflated over the years by yield 
increases from agronomic advances 
such as better varieties and higher 
populations.”
Faced with evidence contradicting 
an accepted paradigm, the four soil 
scientists searched the published literature
for field studies that included 
baseline soil organic carbon data. In 
numerous publications spanning 
more than 100 years and a wide variety
of cropping and tillage practices, 
they found consistent evidence of an 
organic carbon decline for fertilized 
soils throughout the Corn Belt. This 
decline will be exacerbated if cornstalks
are harvested for bioenergy 
production.
“Inorganic nitrogen has long been 
known to promote decomposition of 
carbonaceous residues by stimulating 
the activities of soil microorganisms, 
although the paradigm still widely 
persists that nitrogen fertilizers build 
soil organic carbon,” explains co-author
Richard Mulvaney.
According to the researchers, the 
scientific evidence for this view is 
more apparent than real and comes 
from numerous studies involving a 
final but not initial sampling (often to 
a limited depth) for comparison of organic
carbon levels with and without 
nitrogen fertilization.
While not questioning the vital 
importance of nitrogen fertilizers 
for corn production, the researchers 
point out that these fertilizers will 
be most profitable when application 
rates are not excessive and that such 
rates will minimize the extent of residue
decomposition and reduce nitrate 
pollution. In explaining the need for 
this strategy, they cite published evidence
that soils hold more than twice 
as much carbon as the air and that a 
minor decrease in organic matter can 
lead to substantial atmospheric carbon
dioxide enrichment.
Because soils differ in their capacities
to supply nitrogen, Khan and his 
colleagues stress the need for soil testing,
ideally on a site-specific basis, as 
a prerequisite to soil-based nitrogen 
management that optimizes fertilizer 
rates. They point out the potential 
benefits by comparing USDA data for 
Iowa and Illinois, the two states that 
rank highest in corn production. From 
1994 to 2001, annual grain yields in 
Iowa averaged 43 million Mg (1.7 billion
bushels) with 0.67 million Mg of 
nitrogen compared with an average 
of 38 million Mg (1.5 billion bushels) 
produced in Illinois with 0.77 million 
Mg of nitrogen. The difference translates
into lower fertilizer efficiency 
that costs Illinois farmers $66 million 
per year.
Khan, S.A., R.L. Mulvaney, T.R. Ellsworth,
and C.W. Boast. 2007. The myth 
of nitrogen fertilization for soil carbon sequestration.
J. Environ. Qual. 36:1821–
1832. View the full article online at http://
jeq.scijournals.org/content/vol36/issue6/
THE new EC-5 measures soil moisture with minimal effects fromtexture and salinity by incorporating a high-frequency oscillator.
Thousands of EC-5s are currently being used throughout the world to
monitor soil moisture in research watersheds, greenhouses, and
agricultural land.
� TDR accuracy
with a compact
design.
� Low power,
durable sensor
for long-term
monitoring of
remote field
areas.
� Easily
incorporated
into a variety of
data loggers
including
Decagon's plugand-play
Em50.
Gone are the days of soil moisture
sensors sensitive to texture and salinity.
2365 NE Hopkins Court, Pullman, Washington 99163
800-755-2751 fax 509-332-5158 soils@decagon.com
www.decagon.com International 1-509-332-2756D
DECAGON
DEVICES
  CSA News V52 N12 December 2007 
re
se
A
rc
h
 &
 iN
D
u
st
ry
The United States has embarked on an ambitious program to develop technology and infrastructure
to economically and 
sustainably produce ethanol from 
biomass. Corn stover, the above 
ground material left in fields after 
corn grain harvest, has been identified
as a primary feedstock. Stover 
and other crop biomass or residue are 
frequently referred to as “trash” or 
“waste,” implying they have minimal 
value. However, scientists like Wally 
Wilhelm, from the USDA-ARS Agroecosystems
Management Research 
Unit in Lincoln, NE, point out that 
when returned to the land, this carbon-rich
material helps control ero-
sion, replenishes soil organic matter, 
and improves soil quality. Wilhelm, 
the lead author of an article on this 
topic appearing in the November–
December 2007 Agronomy Journal, 
says organic matter in the soil retains 
and recycles nutrients and improves 
soil structure, aeration, and water exchange
characteristics. In addition, 
organic matter is the energy source 
for the soil ecosystem.
“Sustainable biofuel production 
will require that the functions of organic
matter in the soil be addressed 
before crop residue is removed from 
the land,” says Doug Karlen, USDAARS
soil scientist at the National Soil 
Tilth Laboratory at Ames, IA and coauthor
of the Agronomy Journal ar-
ticle. “To date, projected sustainable 
harvest levels have been calculated 
by reducing total stover production 
by amounts needed to keep soil erosion
losses within accepted limits.”
Most estimates of the amount of 
crop residue that can be sustainably 
harvested consider only erosion as a 
constraining factor, without considering
the need to maintain soil organic 
matter. Recently Jane Johnson, a coauthor
of the paper, and her cowork-
ers located at the USDA-ARS North 
Central Soil Conservation Research 
Laboratory at Morris, MN reported 
estimates of the minimum biomass 
input needed to maintain soil organic 
matter. Wilhelm and this team compared
the amount of stover needed to 
replenish soil organic matter and control
water and wind erosion under a 
limited number of production conditions—continuous
corn and corn pro-
duced in rotation with soybean with 
moldboard plow or conservation tillage
practices. The amount of stover 
needed to replenish soil organic matter
was greater than that required to 
control either water or wind erosion 
in the 10 counties (in 9 of the top 11 
corn production states in the U.S.) investigated.
This outcome emphasizes 
the need to further evaluate the validity
of widely circulated estimates of 
U.S. cropland capacity to sustainably 
supply feedstock for the emerging 
cellulosic ethanol industry.
The authors conclude that there 
is a critical need to gather additional
high quality replicated field data 
from multiple locations to confirm 
their calculations and to expand the 
computations to a broader range of 
cropping systems before major decisions
are made about the percentage 
of stover that can be designated for 
biomass energy production. In addition,
they say that an extensive effort 
is needed to expand development of 
existing crops, discover and develop 
unconventional crops, and create and 
deploy advanced cropping systems 
that exploit the potential of all crops 
so that biomass production can be 
greatly expanded to provide a sustainable
supply of cellulosic feedstock 
without reducing soil organic matter, 
and thus undermining the productive 
capacity of the soil.
Wilhelm, W.W., J.M.F. Johnson, D.L. 
Karlen, and D.T. Lightle. 2007. Corn 
stover to sustain soil organic carbon 
further constrains biomass supply. 
Agron. J. 99:1665–1667. View the full 
article online at http://agron.scijournals.
org/content/vol99/issue6/
Biofuel Feedstock Supply Limited by 
Soil Organic Matter Concerns
Corn stover bales at a research site in York County, NE.
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 7
r
eseA
rc
h &
 iN
D
u
stry
Rainfall, irrigation, and evaporation are the main sources and causes for 
water storage variation and water 
movement in arid soil, but how fast 
can water move in the soil? It is 
generally known that soil saturated 
hydraulic conductivity (Ks), which 
is one of the parameters to describe 
the ability of water movement in soil, 
is similar for the same soil texture. 
When infiltrometers (double-ring infiltrometers,
Guelph infiltrometers, 
etc.) are used to determine saturated 
hydraulic conductivity, it is commonly
assumed that the soil is homo-
geneous within the measured area. 
However, hydraulic conductivity can 
vary significantly within a short distance
due to soil spatial variability 
and heterogeneity. This suggests that 
double-ring infiltrometers may give 
size-dependent results.
In the November–December 2007 
issue of the Soil Science Society of 
America Journal (SSSAJ), scientists 
at China Agricultural University 
measured soil saturated hydraulic
conductivity at seven sites using 
four different sizes of double-ring 
infiltrometers  to identify the size 
dependency. In the study, the inner 
ring diameters, di, were 20, 40, 80, and 
120 cm, and the soil textures at seven 
sites were similar. The results showed 
that the mean hydraulic conductivity 
does not change significantly over the 
full range of inner-ring diameters, but 
the range and standard deviation of 
the measurements decrease appreciably
with increasing di. 
“As the ring size increases, the representativeness
of the area covered 
by the infiltrometer also increases, so 
the measured hydraulic conductivity 
becomes more representative and stable,”
explains Jianbin Lai, lead author 
of the SSSAJ article.
According to the authors, it is necessary
to investigate this size effect in 
more soil conditions to determine how 
the inner-ring size of a double-ring 
infiltrometer influences the measured 
hydraulic conductivity in heterogeneous
soil. Thanks to the numerical 
simulation model HYDRUS-2D, 
which simulated the soil water 
infiltration process, detailed numerical
investigations have been conduct-
ed for this purpose. In the study, six 
correlation lengths (L = 0, 10, 20, 50, 
100, and 200 cm) and six standard 
deviation values (SD = 0, 0.1, 0.25, 
0.5, 0.75, and 1.0) of a random field 
of log(Ks) were used for the various 
realizations of hydraulic conductivity
fields. Ten realizations have been 
performed for each combination of L 
and SD treatment and infiltrometer 
diameter (10, 20, 40, 80, 120, and 200 
cm). Because only a single realization 
is needed when SD = 0, this gave a total
of 1,806 realizations, and it seemed 
to conduct 10 replicates of field 
experiments for each infiltrometer at 
31 different locations. 
The study showed that the variability
of measured hydraulic conductiv-
ity is greater for smaller inner rings 
(e.g., di < 40 cm), and it gradually decreases
as the ring size increases.
“Where soil spatial variability is 
high, infiltrometers having a large 
inner ring (in general di > 80 cm) are 
essential for reliable measurement,” 
says Li Ren, co-author of the article. 
“Large-diameter infiltrometers produce
more stable values than small-
diameter ones, so they represent an 
efficient method for improving measurement
representativeness.”
The research was funded by Grant 
No. 50339030 key research project and 
Grant No. 50479012 research project 
from National Natural Science Foundation
of China. It was also sponsored 
by the Program for Changjiang Scholars
and Innovative Research Team 
in University (IRT0412), Ministry of 
Education, China.
Lai, J., and L. Ren. 2007. Assessing the 
size dependency of measured hydraulic 
conductivity using double-ring 
infiltrometers and numerical simulation. 
Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 71:1667–1675. 
View the full article online at http://soil. 
scijournals.org/content/vol71/issue6/
Infiltrometer Size Affects Reliability of 
Measured Soil Hydraulic Conductivity
LEFT: Double-ring infiltrometer (di = 
40 cm). The nested ring, a cylinder with 
a base that nested and fixed in the inner
ring by four pins, was held several 
centimeters above the soil surface, so it 
did not affect the infiltration process. 
The nested-ring has two functions: (i) it 
mainly reduces the upper free water area 
in the inner ring, resulting in improved 
measurement accuracy, and (ii) it minimizes
surface evaporative losses, espe-
cially for a long-term infiltration.
  CSA News V52 N12 December 2007
re
se
A
rc
h
 &
 iN
D
u
st
ry
Selection for either high-oil or high-protein concen-tration in corn grain has been effective for over 100 generations, resulting in corn strains with ~220 g 
kg–1 oil or ~320 g kg–1 protein. An explanation for this long 
continued response to selection could contribute to an understanding
of the potential of plant breeding to feed the 
world. If epistasis (interaction between genes at different 
loci) is important in controlling a trait, then selection can 
be effective for much longer than predicted by simple genetic
models.
In an upcoming report that will be published in the January–February
2008 issue of Crop Science, scientists at the 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign investigate 
the importance of epistasis in controlling protein and oil 
concentration. Specifically, 500 S2 progeny from the random-mated
10 generation of the cross of generation 70 of 
Illinois High Oil (~170 g kg–1 oil) 3 Illinois Low Oil (<10 g 
kg–1 oil) and from the random-mated 7 generation of the 
cross of generation 70 of Illinois High Protein (~270 g kg–1 
protein) 3 Illinois Low Protein (~45 g kg–1 protein) and 
their testcross progeny are evaluated.
Protein and oil concentration were evaluated at three 
locations for two years for selfed and testcross progeny in 
both crosses. Five hundred molecular markers were used 
in each study, and the significance of two-factor interactions
among all 500 markers was measured for both oil 
and protein. The number of quantitative trait loci (QTL) 
identified by single-factor analysis and the number of 
QTL significant in epistatic interactions were compared.
Of the total number of markers significantly associated 
with a QTL (identified either by single-factor analysis or 
in significant epistatic combinations), 46.3 to 72.2% were 
associated only with an epistatic interaction. Thus, the 
number of QTL controlling a trait is much larger than usually
found by simple single-factor analysis.  
“The finding of large numbers of QTL involved in epistatic
interactions in these crosses suggests the long-con-
tinued response to selection in the Illinois long-term selection
strains may be due in part to epistasis,” explains the 
study’s author, John Dudley. “If similar findings are true 
for yield in corn, then the long continued success of hybrid 
corn breeding may also be due to epistasis, and selection 
within a narrow germplasm base may be successful for a 
much longer period of time than is often envisaged.”
For the findings from this study to be most useful in 
selection, Dudley says additional research is needed to 
determine the importance of including epistatic effects in 
models used for predicting future performance.
Dudley, J. 2007. Epistatic interactions in crosses of Illinois 
High Oil 3 Illinois Low Oil and of Illinois High Protein 3 
Illinois Low Protein corn strains. Crop Sci. 48. The full article 
will be posted online by mid-January at http://crop.scijournals.
org/content/vol48/issue1/
Gene Interaction a 
Reason for Long-term 
Response to Selection
Journal of Environmental Quality: “Overview of Hypoxia 
around the World,” by R.J. Diaz (Vol. 30, p. 275–281). View 
online at http://jeq.scijournals.org/content/vol33/issue2/
Soil Science Society of America Journal: “An Assessment 
of Environmental and Solution Parameter Impact on TraceMetal
Sorption by Soils,” by R.D. Harter and R. Naidu 
(Vol. 65, p. 597–612). View online at http://soil.scijournals.
org/content/vol65/issue3/
Vadose Zone Journal: “Adsorption–Desorption Processes in 
Subsurface Reactive Transport Modeling,” by S. Goldberg, 
L.J. Criscenti, D.R. Turner, J.A. Davis, and K.J. Cantrell 
(Vol. 6, p. 407–435). View online at http://vzj.scijournals.org/
content/vol6/issue3/
These articles received the most website hits in October:
Agronomy Journal: “Establishing Management Classes for 
Broadacre Agricultural Production,” by J.A. Taylor, A.B. McBratney,
and B.M. Whelan (Vol. 99, p. 1366–1376). View online 
at http://agron.scijournals.org/content/vol99/issue5/
Crop Science: “Simulating Source-Limited and Sink-Limited 
Kernel Set with CERES-Maize,” by J.I. Lizaso, A.E. Fonseca, 
and M.E. Westgate (Vol. 47, p. 2078–2088). View online at 
http://crop.scijournals.org/content/vol47/issue5/
Journal of Natural Resources and Life Sciences Education: 
“The Nile River Basin: A Case Study in Surface Water Conflict
Resolution,” by M. El-Fadel, Y. El-Sayegh, K. El-Fadl, and 
D. Khorbotly (Vol. 32, p. 107–117). View online at www.jnrlse.
org/issues.php
Most Frequently Read Journal Articles
Means for Illinois High Oil (IHO) and Illinois Low Oil (ILO) 
plotted against generations. Progress is shown over 105 generations
of selection.
 Research Roundup
December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 
If projected increases in the use of corn for ethanol pro-duction occur, the harm to water quality could be con-siderable, and water supply problems at the regional 
and local levels could also arise, says a new report from 
the National Research Council (NRC). The committee that 
wrote the report examined policy options and identified 
opportunities for new agricultural techniques and technologies
to help minimize effects of biofuel production 
on water resources.
Recent increases in oil prices in conjunction with subsidy
policies have led to a dramatic expansion in corn 
ethanol production and high interest in further expansion 
over the next decade, says the report. Because of strong 
national interest in greater energy independence, in this 
year’s State of the Union address, President Bush called 
for the production of 35 billion gallons of ethanol by 2017, 
which would equal about 15% of the U.S. liquid transportation
fuels.
An NRC committee looked at how shifts in the nation’s 
agriculture to include more energy crops, and potentially 
more crops overall, could affect water management and 
long-term sustainability of biofuel production. Based on 
findings presented at a July colloquium, the committee 
came to several conclusions about biofuel production and 
identified options for addressing them.
In terms of water quantity, the committee found that 
agricultural shifts to growing corn and expanding biofuel 
crops into regions with little agriculture, especially dry areas,
could change current irrigation practices and greatly 
increase pressure on water resources in many parts of the 
United States. The amount of rainfall and other hydroclimate
conditions from region to region causes significant 
variations in the water requirement for the same crop, the 
report says. For example, in the Northern and Southern 
Plains, corn generally uses more water than soybeans and 
cotton, while the reverse is true in the Pacific and mountain
regions of the country. Water demands for drinking, 
industry, and such uses as hydropower, fish habitat, and 
recreation could compete with, and in some cases, constrain
the use of water for biofuel crops in some regions. 
Consequently, growing biofuel crops that require additional
irrigation in areas with limited water supplies is a 
major concern, the report says.
Even though a large body of information exists for the 
nation’s agricultural water requirements, fundamental 
knowledge gaps prevent making reliable assessments 
about the water impacts of future large-scale production 
of feedstocks other than corn, such as switchgrass and native
grasses. In addition, other aspects of crop production 
for biofuel may not be fully anticipated using the frameworks
that exist for food crops. For example, biofuel crops 
could be irrigated with wastewater that is biologically and 
chemically unsuitable for use with food crops, or genetically
modified crops that are more water efficient could 
be developed.
National Research Council Report: Increase in Ethanol Production 
from Corn Could Significantly Impact Water Quality, Availability
r
eseA
rc
h &
 iN
D
u
stry
LEFT: A new report by the National Research Council states that agricultural shifts to growing corn and expanding biofuel crops 
into regions with little agriculture could change current irrigation practices and greatly increase pressure on water resources in 
many parts of the United States. RIGHT: The report also says the quality of groundwater, rivers, and coastal and offshore waters 
could be impacted by increased fertilizer and pesticide use for biofuels. Photo by Ken Hammond (USDA-ARS).
(Continued on page 13)
 Re
se
a
Rc
h
 &
 In
d
u
st
Ry
10  CSA News  V52 N12 December 2007
An emerging field of science called metagenomics offers a revolutionary new approach to studying microbes by applying genomic analysis to entire 
microbial communities. Just as 17th-century microscopes 
gave scientists their first glimpse of the microbial world, 
metagenomics gives today’s scientists a new tool for the 
study of complex communities of microorganisms, opening
the door to a realm that was previously inaccessible 
to science. 
“Metagenomics may be the most important event in 
microbiology since the invention of the microscope,” says 
Jo Handelsman, co-chair of the National Research Council’s
new report on metagenomics. And a greater under-
standing of microbes could be key to addressing some of 
today’s most complex medical, environmental, agricultural,
and economic challenges, the report says.
A miniscule fraction of the microbial species on earth—
most scientists estimate less than 1%—can be cultured using
current methods. Metagenomics allows researchers to 
access the genomes of an entire microbe community without
the need to culture individual organisms, making it 
possible to simultaneously study millions of species that 
cannot be examined in the laboratory. 
Metagenomics studies begin by obtaining a sample 
from a particular environment such as seawater, soil, or 
the human gut; extracting genetic material from all the 
organisms in the sample; and then analyzing it to gain inMeta
New Science of
by Anne Jurkowski
sights on how members of the community interact and 
perform complex functions. One of the biggest challenges 
will be manipulating the enormous amount of data that 
is generated to better understand single species, selected 
parts of the sample, or the dynamics of the entire community.
Shedding light on thousands of new microorganisms 
may change the way scientists understand fundamental 
biological concepts as well as lead to practical applications
for human health, agriculture, and environmental 
stewardship, according to the report. Microbes naturally 
perform complex biochemical transformations that help 
clean up such hazardous pollutants as gasoline leaks, oil 
spills, sewage, and nuclear waste. Some microbes create
byproducts such as hydrogen, methane, and buta-
nol—potential sources of renewable energy. Studying the 
characteristics of such microbes can help scientists learn 
to channel microbial capabilities to help us manage tough 
environmental and economic problems. 
Microbes even play a major role in maintaining human 
health. “We have 10 times more bacterial cells in our bodies
than human cells, so we’re 90% bacteria,” Handelsman 
says. These microbial inhabitants help our bodies digest 
food and even defend us from pathogens. Given that hundreds
of drugs available today were derived from chemi-
cals first found in microbes, studying microbial communities
holds great potential for developing new ways to 
diagnose, treat, and prevent disease.
The Research Council report was requested by several 
federal agencies interested in the potential of metagenomics
and how best to encourage its success. In particular, the 
committee was asked to recommend promising directions 
for future studies. It concluded that the most efficient way 
to boost the field of metagenomics overall would be to 
establish a Global Metagenomics Initiative that includes 
a few large-scale, internationally coordinated projects and 
numerous medium- and small-size studies.
“Because the challenges and opportunities presented 
by metagenomics are so enormous, a large-scale commitment
equivalent to that of the Human Genome Project 
is both justified and necessary,” says committee co-chair 
James M. Tiedje. Interdisciplinary collaboration and an array
of federal agencies would help to build the foundation 
of standard methods and databases necessary for this new 
field to reach its full potential.
—SOURCE: The National Academies In Focus 7(2): 11–12. 
See http://infocusmagazine.org.
May Revolutionize Understanding of Microbes
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 11
Dianne Bourne can’t tell the difference. “The taste is the same, the looks are the same, but from a micro-biological standpoint, the oysters over here”—she 
points to a tray full of unshucked Virginia oysters—“are 
cleaner by far than the waters they came from. That’s not 
what I typically see.”
A food science microbiologist, Bourne has seen similar 
effects in a variety of foods being processed in a new way, 
from cold cuts to fresh juices to salsa and guacamole.
Foods like these are sold based on freshness—often 
with a brief product life. Shucked oysters are typically 
unusable within 15 days of processing, even if they have 
been maintained at proper temperatures. The same goes 
for fresh, ready-to-eat foods, such as raw salsa. In some 
foods, such as prepared entrees and ready-to-eat deli 
foods, preservatives are used to lengthen the shelf life, but 
these additives can change the flavor of foods and cause 
allergic reactions in some consumers.
A laboratory in Virginia Tech’s College of Agriculture 
and Life Sciences is employing an unusual technique—
high hydrostatic pressure processing, or HPP—to extend 
the shelf life of fresh foods without additives. High-pressure
processing essentially operates on the principle that 
when large amounts of hydrostatic pressure are applied 
to an object, anything living and replicating within it is 
going to have a hard time carrying on normal functions. 
The technique works without additives and isn’t likely to 
make people wary the way that other techniques, like irradiation,
have. High-pressure processing also works well 
with many raw foods: in fresh juices it zaps E. coli without 
pasteurization, in fresh guacamole it extends the shelf life 
without additives, and in sushi it wipes out most parasites
without altering the delicate flavors of the fish.
The technique is based on a discovery made in 1899 at 
the Agricultural Experiment Station labs at West Virginia 
University. Chemist Bert Hite used a manually operated 
steel cylinder to pressurize milk and was able to show 
that shelf life and quality could be extended by several 
days. This early research was promising, but the equipment
was prone to catastrophic failure due to the extreme 
pressures Hite and his colleagues were trying to achieve. 
Hite’s 1899 paper catalogs the failure of one pressure rig 
after another. In one experiment, milk was inoculated 
with live Salmonella typhi (the bacteria that causes typhoid 
fever), but in the first attempt to pressurize the sample to 
90 tons, “the steel cylinder, the lead tube, the tin tube, and 
one of the pistons went to pieces, scattering the germs all 
over the room.” After one of the staff members contracted 
typhoid, that portion of the experiment was discontinued. 
The initial research showed that the idea had potential, 
but the technology would have to log more than a century 
of refinement.
Meanwhile, the public’s expectation that food be safe 
has continued to increase. It seems that the further removed
the average consumer is from the farm, the higher 
the expectation of purity in farm products becomes. Consumers
in developed nations want to have the assurance 
that the foods they buy will not cause disease. As a result, 
processors have to be more meticulous than ever about 
the food safety hazards that may be present in their products.
Even in cases where the potential pathogen is com-
mon throughout the environment, as with Listeria monocytogenes,
processors of ready-to-eat foods are required to 
have a perfect record when it comes to keeping it out of 
the finished product. “This isn’t easy,” says George Flick, 
University Distinguished Professor of food science and 
technology. “Companies are always looking for a cost-effective
way to maintain safety and eliminate pathogens. 
High hydrostatic pressure processing is one way some 
of them can make their foods safer without making the 
products look, smell, or taste different.”
How Does HPP Work?
No one knows for sure how HPP works, but the prevailing
theory is that it alters the folding and assemblage, 
or tertiary and quaternary structure, of membrane-bound 
proteins, thus affecting membrane integrity and function. 
In a steak, for example, this effect—a subtle but highly 
significant shift in the shape of the membrane-bound proteins—is
observed in both the muscle cell membranes and 
Food-processing technique 
extends shelf life of fresh 
foods without additivesby Angela Correa
r
eseA
rc
h &
 iN
D
u
stry
Oysters ready for high hydrostatic pressure processing. The 
oysters are banded prior to processing to ensure that the shells 
stay closed after the procedure. 
 12 CSA News V52 N12 December 2007
re
se
A
rc
h
 &
 iN
D
u
st
ry the flora that may be present on the steak’s surface. Highpressure
processing leaves both types of cells essentially 
unchanged, with the difference being that the bacterial 
flora are now just as inert as the muscle tissue they reside 
upon.
This same effect is also seen in functional proteins, such 
as enzymes. High-pressure processing makes it possible 
to inactivate enzymes and may retard spoilage in this 
way. Without treatment, enzymes produced when the 
food was alive and whole can hasten spoilage in the finished
food product.
These findings open up a wealth of possibilities for research
on many types of foods, vaccines, biologics, and 
seeds. The HPP laboratory at Virginia Tech has several 
projects underway in these areas.
Optimizing Parameters for Different Foods
Not every food can be treated with high pressure—
bread, for example, is flattened by the process, and 
marshmallows don’t survive well either. High-pressure 
processing is suitable for foods with high water content 
and few or no gas pockets within their structure. So while 
it is great for strawberries, it’s better if they are sliced first 
so that the little hollow in the middle of the berry doesn’t 
become a liability. The requirements for processing foods 
under high pressure also differ in terms of the holding period,
level of pressure, and temperature at which pressur-
ization is conducted. These parameters are developed by 
trial and replication and are different for each food.
The Virginia Tech laboratory has been used to optimize 
processing schedules for a wide variety of foods, from 
fresh salads to cold cuts to pureed fruits. Foods are analyzed
thoroughly before and after processing for changes 
in flavor, texture, color, microbial counts, and chemical attributes.
As a result, the lab has helped several companies 
to develop and refine HPP protocols for such products as 
ready-to-eat sandwich meats, shrimp, clams, and potato 
salad.
Preventing Foodborne Disease
Certain foods, especially those that are often eaten raw, 
carry a higher risk for harboring pathogens. Norovirus infection,
known as the “cruise ship virus,” sickens 22 mil-
lion people annually in the United States and is the most 
commonly occurring foodborne illness in the world. At 
Virginia Tech, USDA-funded work is underway to determine
the HPP parameters needed to eliminate norovirus-
es from selected food products.
Phase one of this project has been completed. “We determined
the HPP parameters needed to inactivate norovi-
rus using a mouse model, both in culture and in oysters,” 
says food scientist Daniel Holliman, who directs research 
at the laboratory. “It takes somewhat more pressure to kill 
this virus than is now being used in the oyster industry, 
but the pressure levels are achievable with the technology 
currently in use.”
Holliman is the principal investigator in a number of 
projects taking aim at decreasing the infectivity of highrisk
foods. He says, “The better we can understand the 
cellular, biochemical, and enzymatic consequences of 
HPP treatment on bacteria, viruses, and parasites, the 
more reliably we can apply this technology to make the 
food supply safer.”
Holliman’s current research also includes developing 
HPP protocols to inactivate hepatitis A virus in oysters 
and to eradicate a variety of parasites in meats and fruits.
Simplifying Vaccine Development
The unique mechanism by which HPP inactivates bacteria,
viruses, and parasites can yield an organism that is 
noninfective, but still immunologically active. This curious
possibility opens the way for simplified development 
of new vaccines. Preliminary studies are underway to 
generate a vaccine against Burkholderia cepacia, an organism
that can cause fatal lung infections in patients with 
cystic fibrosis. In phase one, Virginia Tech’s HPP researchers
determined the high-pressure inactivation parameters 
for the organism in vitro. Many other illnesses, including 
new and emerging infections, may be candidates for HPPgenerated
vaccines. Holliman’s team has plans to examine 
a variety of organisms, with the goal of developing vaccines
for them using HPP. Preliminary studies for HPP in-
activation/vaccine generation for Mycobacterium marinum, 
a fish and human pathogen, began in August. M. marinum 
is similar in many ways to Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the 
organism that causes tuberculosis in humans. 
“We hope that the data generated in this study will 
lead to new vaccine approaches for human tuberculosis, 
in addition to the veterinary applications,” says Holliman. 
“There is no limit to the potential candidates for new vaccines
that could be generated using our techniques.”
In the future, this technology could also be used to enhance
or purify existing vaccines and biopharmaceuticals 
Daniel Holliman, research director at the Virginia Tech high 
hydrostatic pressure processing laboratory, loads the highpressure
vessel with a basket of product.
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 1
and to develop novel compounds using HPP-induced alterations
of conformational and chemical structures.
Helping Industry
High-pressure processing can provide food manufacturers
an edge in the marketplace. By extending shelf life 
and halting enzymatic processes that lower food quality, 
HPP can boost the availability and consumer appeal of 
many products, leading to improved profit potential. The 
Virginia Tech laboratory works with many outside companies
to assist them in considering the application of 
high pressure in their food products.
“Competition is fierce among food manufacturers, and 
they’re always looking for ways to provide a better product
or a novel presentation for their consumers,” says lab 
manager Laura Douglas. “We provide a complete package
of testing services for private label firms. We can de-
velop a process schedule that will work for their needs; 
test our results thoroughly from a sensory, microbiology, 
and chemical standpoint; and deliver sample batches of 
product along with a complete report to decision makers 
within the company. Confidentiality is always assured.”
In these ways, the lab serves as an unbiased provider 
of information and can support the adoption of the new 
technology for use in products when it is a good fit.
“The shellfish industry in particular finds that HPP 
opens up some exciting possibilities, because while it is 
extending shelf life and eliminating risks from Vibrios 
and other pathogens, it also releases the shell of bivalves, 
making them very easy and quick to shuck. They open 
right up,” says Flick.
Oysters processed with HPP have been on the market 
for a few years, but only a few processing firms have made 
the transition to using HPP equipment. Crab and lobster 
products are also great candidates for HPP, as are many 
high-cost foods with a short shelf life. “Shellfish processors
need to carefully consider the benefits and costs of 
HPP for their own operation,” says Flick.
Farmers and harvesters can follow every safety guideline
out there and still be unable to completely prevent 
microbial contamination of their products—that’s the way 
it is. But processors now have the option to mitigate food 
safety hazards later in processing without altering their 
product with heat, additives, or freezing.
The technology is a boon for those who want to increase 
their intake of raw or fresh foods and for those who try 
not to eat anything they can’t pronounce. It’s also a great 
safeguard for infants, the immunocompromised, and the 
elderly. In sectors of the food industry that produce fresh 
salads, juices, and salsas; deli meats; and high-value seafood,
HPP is well known and has become the gold stan-
dard for food safety and quality. For other sectors, more 
research is required before the technology can be adopted 
as a safe and palatable alternative for processing.
—sourCe: Virginia Tech Research (Winter 2007 Issue); 
See www.research.vt.edu/resmag/backissues.html
The quality of groundwater, rivers, and coastal and offshore
waters could be impacted by increased fertilizer and 
pesticide use for biofuels, the report says. High levels of 
nitrogen in stream flows are a major cause of low-oxygen 
or “hypoxic” regions, commonly known as “dead zones,” 
which are lethal for most living creatures and cover broad 
areas of the Gulf of Mexico, Chesapeake Bay, and other regions.
The report notes that there are a number of agricul-
tural practices and technologies that could be employed 
to reduce nutrient pollution, such as injecting fertilizer 
below the soil surface, using controlled-release fertilizers 
that have water-insoluble coatings, and optimizing the 
amount of fertilizer applied to the land.
A possible metric to gauge the impact of biofuels on 
water quality could be to compare the amount of fertilizers
and pesticides used on various crops, the committee 
suggests. For example, corn has the greatest application 
rates of both fertilizer and pesticides per acre, higher than 
for soybeans and mixed-species grassland biomass. The 
switch from other crops or noncrop plants to corn would 
likely lead to much higher application rates of highly 
soluble nitrogen, which could migrate to drinking water 
wells, rivers, and streams, according to the committee. 
When not removed from water before consumption, high 
levels of nitrate and nitrite—products of nitrogen fertilizers—could
have significant health impacts.
Nutrient and sediment pollution in streams and rivers 
could also both be attributed to soil erosion. High sedimentation
rates carry financial consequences as they in-
crease the cost of often-mandatory dredging for transportation
and recreation. The committee observed that ero-
sion might be minimized if future production of biofuels 
looks to perennial crops, like switchgrass, poplars or willows,
or prairie polyculture, which could hold the soil and 
nutrients in place better than most row crops. The committee
also identified other ways that farming could be 
improved, such as conservation tillage and leaving most 
or all of the cornstalks and cobs in the field after the grain 
has been harvested.
For biorefineries, the water consumed for the ethanol 
production process—although modest compared with the 
water used growing biofuel crops—could substantially 
affect local water supplies, the committee concludes. A 
biorefinery that produces 100 million gallons of ethanol 
a year would use the equivalent of the water supply for 
a town of about 5,000 people. Biorefineries could generate
intense challenges for local water supplies, depending 
on where the facilities are located. However, use of water 
in biorefineries is declining as ethanol producers increasingly
incorporate water recycling and develop new meth-
ods of converting feedstocks to fuels that increase energy 
yields while reducing water use, the committee notes.
—sourCe: The National Academies, Washington, DC; 
See http://national-academies.org/
r
eseA
rc
h &
 iN
D
u
stry
Ethanol Production and Water Quality
(Continued from page 9)
 SSSA Past President’s Message
1 CSA News V52 N12 December 2007
so
c
ie
ty
 &
 p
o
li
c
y
 N
ew
s
Back to the Future
by Rattan Lal
Every time one travels from the U.S. or Western Europe to sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) 
and South Asia (SA), one is struck 
by two distinct scenarios for applying
the knowledge of soil science to 
the pressing global issues. One is to 
modernize or replace the subsistence 
agricultural practices in SSA and SA 
suspended in time dating back to 
centuries if not millennia. The other 
is to use soil science to help solve 
the problems of the modern civilization
through the 21st century. The 
first scenario must endeavor to use 
soils in SSA and SA with the focus 
on meeting the basic necessity of 
life (e.g., food, feed, fiber, and fuel). 
The second is to use soils in the developed/industrialized
societies to 
improve the environment, mitigate 
climate change, dispose of industrial/urban
and nuclear waste, grow 
biofuel feedstock, and produce industrial
raw materials.
The commonality in both scenarios,
towards soil management 
strategies in developing and developed
economies, is the strong link 
between the human diet and agricultural
sustainability. Promoting 
healthy diets human in populations 
has a strong impact on sustainable 
agricultural practices. Apparently, 
obesity, heart disease, and type-2 
diabetes are health-related problems 
in developed countries. In contrast, 
hunger caused by low-caloric intake, 
hidden hunger by lack of protein, 
and malnutrition by deficiency of 
minerals (i.e., zinc, iron, and iodine) 
are problems in developing countries 
of SSA and SA. Both of these issues 
are strongly linked to sustainable 
agriculture in general, but judicious 
management of soils in particular. 
It is easy to find these contrasting 
scenarios separated by just 15 hours 
of air travel from the U.S. to SSA and 
SA. Visitors to these contrasting situations
can feel like they’re in a time 
warp.
The Al-Khwarzimi Approach
One can accept the status quo and 
be contented by saying “tatha astu” 
(so be it). The other option is to be 
proactive and do something about 
these equally dire but contrasting 
scenarios. Indeed, soil science has a 
bright future in addressing both by 
using some kind of algorithm. An 
Arabic treatise of 12th century A.D. 
On the Hindu Art of Reckoning was 
translated into Latin, thus giving the 
world its decimal system. The author 
of this treatise was a scholar from 
Baghdad by the name of Muhammad
ibn Musa Al-Khwarzimi. His 
name was Latinized into Alogoritimi 
and eventually Anglicized into Algorithm,
meaning a technique of solv-
ing problems step by step (New York 
Times, 23 Sept. 2007).
Soil scientists may have to adopt 
the Al-Khwarzimi (algorithmic) approach
to address these contrasting 
scenarios by taking one systematic 
step at a time. Soil 
scientists can 
neither afford 
to ignore the resource-poor
farm-
ers and 850 million 
people facing food 
insecurity (Borlaug,
Science, 19 
Oct. 2007), nor those in the affluent 
world who are rapidly spoiling their 
own nest by the wastes produced 
through a lifestyle that leaves a lot 
to be desired. Fortunately, the basic 
principles of soil science to address 
these two contrasting scenarios are 
the same: soil ethics based on stewardship
of soil resources. 
The Sacred Battle
Soil degradation and desertification
in SSA, SA, and elsewhere are 
the root cause of low yields, hunger 
and malnutrition, civil strife, and political
unrest (Fig. 1). Any successful 
resolution to eliminating hunger/
poverty and political/social instability
necessitates reversal of the soil 
degradation through investments in 
Fig. 1. Soil degradation–induced poverty, starvation, and political/ethnic/
social unrest must be reversed through investment in soil restoration.
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 15
s
o
c
iety &
 p
o
lic
y N
ew
s
restoring degraded/desertified soils 
and ecosystems. If the traditional 
“Green Revolution” concept is valid 
for these regions, it will have to be 
realized through improvements in 
soil quality and sustainable management
of soil and water resources in 
conjunction with the adoption of improved
cultivars grown within eco-
logically compatible cropping/farming
systems. Soil water management, 
expansion of irrigated land area, use 
of drip subsurface irrigation, and 
use of slow-release formulations of 
a new generation of fertilizers are 
among the key elements of such a 
strategy. Soil scientists must take the 
lead in winning the sacred battle of 
providing food for all and making 
“food as the basic human right” as 
their motto.
A Tortoise on the Fence Post
If one comes across as a tortoise 
sitting on top of a fence post, seemingly
enjoying the limelight and the 
view from the vantage position, it 
does not take a rocket scientist to 
figure out that it did not get to such 
a privileged position on its own. It 
must have been the thoughtfulness 
of the entire community (membership
of SSSA) that not only raised it 
to this position but also provided an 
unconditional support throughout 
the duration of its stay on such a 
unique and privileged status. The 
panoramic view from the top of the 
fence post was also made pleasantly 
memorable by the dedication, commitment,
and high professionalism 
of those who provided the best support
on a day-to-day basis (the entire 
headquarters staff of the Societies).
While looking back to peer into 
the future, it is important to thank 
everyone for the unique privilege, 
the great honor, and the opportunity 
of a lifetime. While remembering 
the slogan “In Soil We Trust,” I remind
you all of the sacred mission 
of “Food as the Basic Human Right” 
and “Improved Environment for 
Generations to Come.”
Thank You Members, Staff for a Successful 2007!
by Ellen Bergfeld
As we near the end of the year, I want to take this opportunity to thank our members for their loyalty, support, and participation in 
Society activities. You are the reason that the Societies 
exist, and your input regarding our products and services,
what is of value and what is not, is very impor-
tant. My sincere thanks to our executive committees, 
boards of directors, and all of our volunteers who give 
of their time and wisdom in support and guidance 
of our programs and governance. We had a fantastic meeting in New 
Orleans (we’ll do a retrospective on the meetings in the February issue 
of CSA News)—a great big THANKS to our program chairs, division 
chairs, presenters, and meeting participants. Additionally, I would like 
to thank our authors, editorial boards, and reviewers, as well as our 
libraries and all subscribers to our journals. While subscriptions continue
to decline overall, the positive financial positions of our Societies 
are primarily attributable to journal subscription revenue.
I am immensely grateful to our capable staff. We strive to raise the 
bar regarding our services, and our staff inspire me through their creativity
and passion in doing so. As many of you know, we implemented 
new software for accounting, membership services, subscription fulfillment,
and meeting/conference management during the past two years. 
These changes have taken patience and perseverance by all involved, 
and while we have had some challenges, the conversion allows much 
greater flexibility and adaptability for current and future needs.
For those who were able to attend the meetings in New Orleans, I 
hope that you found them to be invigorating as well as renewing. While 
I know that we always pack a tremendous amount of information into 
a short period of time that leaves most of us exhausted, it is always 
wonderful to renew acquaintances, develop new contacts, and expand 
the networks of friends, colleagues, and mentors. With the centennial 
celebrations of ASA and the excellent lineup of plenary speakers, these 
were definitely meetings to remember. Please be aware that next year’s 
Annual Meetings are a full month earlier, 5–9 Oct. 2008, in Houston. 
All deadlines for the meetings will need to be adjusted accordingly. We 
hope to see you there!
We have an ambitious year ahead implementing many of the recommendations
that have come forth from the task forces who have 
been working to hone the goals and strategies identified by the boards 
during strategic planning in 2006. We look forward to working handin-hand
with you and working hard for you. Please continue to let us 
know what we are doing well and what needs improvement. Our Societies
are evolving, and we need your assistance to ensure that the evolu-
tion occurring is beneficial to you as well as to the world that we live in.
Chief Executive Officer’s Message
R. Lal, SSSA Past President; lal.1@osu.edu.
E. Bergfeld, Chief Executive Officer; ebergfeld@agronomy.org. 
 www.agronomy.org/sciencepolicy/ 
www.crops.org/sciencepolicy/ 
www.soils.org/sciencepolicy/
Science Policy News
1 CSA News V52 N12 December 2007
so
c
ie
ty
 &
 p
o
li
c
y
 N
ew
s
In late October, the Senate Agricul-ture Committee debated, amend-ed, and voted passage of its version
of the 2007 farm bill. The House 
completed its version last summer. 
As of this writing, Democratic majority
leader Sen. Harry Reid (NV) 
announced plans to bring the bill to 
the floor the first week of November. 
Praising the ag committee’s work on 
the five-year comprehensive piece of 
legislation that covers programs including
nutrition, research, energy, 
conservation, crop commodity payments,
and more, Reid predicted 
quick action in the chamber. Farm 
groups and scientific societies interested
in the farm bill, including 
ASA–CSSA–SSSA, are preparing for 
amendments and fights on the floor 
on a variety of issues. 
Research
The Senate farm bill restructures 
the Cooperative State Research, 
Education, and Extension Service 
(CSREES), the grant-administering 
agency at USDA. CSREES will become 
the National Institute of Food and 
Agriculture (NIFA), with increased 
visibility for competitive programs 
and the infrastructure, or “capacity,” 
programs (i.e., the formula funds that 
go to the land grant system to support
research, extension, and educa-
tion). The research title formalizes coordination
between USDA’s in-house 
research agency, the Agricultural Research
Service (ARS), and the newly-
created NIFA. Unfortunately, the 
$200 million in mandatory funding 
for the research, education, and extension
competitive grants program 
known as the Initiative for Future Agricultural
and Food Systems (IFAFS) 
was eliminated, a big loss for our 
community, despite efforts by ASA–
CSSA–SSSA and other organizations 
to prevent this. On the plus side, the 
research title provides $80 million in 
new authorizations for research on 
specialty crops, including mechanization,
plant breeding, genetics, genom-
ics, invasive species, and food safety, 
and provides $80 million for organic 
agriculture research and extension 
to enhance the ability of organic producers
and processors to grow and 
market organic food, feed, and fiber. 
Indirect costs for grants increased 
from 19 to 30%. A plant breeding category
was added to the National Ge-
netic Resources Program. Additional 
categories including sustainable and 
renewable agriculture-based energy 
production, ecosystems services, and 
other categories, as recommended 
by ASA–CSSA–SSSA, were added to 
IFAFS purposes, and 32% of National 
Research Initiative (NRI) funding will 
be dedicated to IFAFS-like research, 
education, and extension. Also supported
by the Societies and included 
in the research title is the addition of 
agricultural genomics and biotechnology
and classical plant breeding 
as NRI research priorities. Overall, 
our priorities fared well.  
Conservation
Conservation fared well during 
markup. Many programs either had 
an increase in funding, or a return to 
baseline. The Grassland Reserve Program
(GRP) was the only program to 
have a reduction in funding from the 
2002 farm bill funding level. However,
both GRP and the Wetlands Re-
serve Program (WRP) had zero budgets
coming into this farm bill, so any 
funding is considered an increase. 
The WRP had considerable overhaul 
in this farm bill with the most notable 
change being to take working lands 
out of eligibility. 
The creation of the 
Comprehens ive 
Stewardship Incentives
Program 
(CSIP) is another 
notable change. 
CSIP is an umbrella
for the Envi-
ronmental Quality 
Incentives Program (EQIP) and Comprehensive
Stewardship Program 
(CSP), formerly named Conservation 
Security Program, aimed at increasing
cooperation between the two pro-
grams as well as promoting agricultural
production and environmental 
quality as compatible goals. There 
was no change in EQIP funding, but 
there was a significant increase for 
CSP by $1.28 billion above baseline. 
Energy
The Senate Energy Title contains 
several new biofuels-related programs
including a mandatory Re-
gional Biomass Crop Experiment 
Program. This new section reads very 
similar to the recommendations laid 
out in Planting for the Future: Crop 
Breeding and Cropping Systems, one of 
the Societies’ 2007 farm bill position 
papers (see www.agronomy.org/
shared/temp/20080201/crops.pdf). 
The purpose of this new program is 
to “initiate multiregion side-by-side crop 
experiments to provide a sound knowledge
base on all aspects of the production 
of biomass energy crops, including crop 
species, nutrient requirements, management
practices, environmental impacts, 
greenhouse gas implications, and economics.”
Funding for this program 
would be $10 million for fiscal year 
Farm Bill Finally on the Move in the Senate: ASA–CSSA–SSSA Provisions Included
by Karl Glasener
K. Glasener, Director of Science Policy; 202408-5382
or kglasener@agronomy.org.
 Traveling to DC? Stay at the 
Societies’ Preferred Hotel 
Society members can receive a 
reduced rate at the Holiday Inn 
Capitol in Washington, DC. 
  Call 202-479-4000 and ask 
for the American Society of 
Agronomy rate, or give them 
the Corporate Account ID 
“100214235.” 
  Or, you can make reservations
on the web at www.
holiday-inn.com. Select “Holiday
Inn Capitol” and type 
in the Corporate Account ID 
“100214235.”
•
•
S
o
c
iety &
 P
o
lic
y N
ew
S
  December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 17
(FY) 2008, $20 million for FY 2009, and 
$10 million for FY 2010. Ten recipient 
institutions will receive the mandatory
dollars according to the three-
year authorization. This program 
represents a great success for our 
community, acknowledging that crop 
varieties and cropping systems development
play a major role in shaping 
sustainable production of feedstocks 
for the grain-ethanol/cellulosic-ethanol
market. Senate Agriculture Com-
mittee Chair Tom Harkin (D-IA) and 
Ranking Member Saxby Chambliss 
(R-GA) should be applauded for the 
development of this new program. 
As the bill in the Senate hits the 
floor, and then the two chambers 
conference their versions of the farm 
bill, we will keep you posted via CSA 
News and the Science Policy Report 
(view the Science Policy Report and 
learn more about farm bill provisions 
at www.agronomy.org/sciencepolicy/
sspr/). View other ASA–CSSA–SSSA 
farm bill position statements on Research
(www.agronomy.org/shared/
temp/20080201/research.pdf) , 
Conservation (www.agronomy.org/
shared/temp/20080201/conservation.
pdf), and Energy (www.agronomy.
org/shared/temp/20080201/soils.
pdf). None of the provisions in the 
Senate bill are set in stone. Changes 
can still be made. With that in mind, 
expect action alerts soon seeking 
your support. For more information 
on the Senate farm bill, see http:// 
agriculture.senate.gov/.
Science Policy Intern Report
New Bill Addresses the Issue of Gender 
Bias in Scientific Professions
by Barbara Fricks
Great strides have been made towards the elimination
of gender discrimination over the past 30+ 
years. In science, the percentage of women earning
Ph.D. degrees drastically increased from less 
than 20% in 1974 to 50% in 2004. However, a publication
released earlier this year by the National 
Academies of Science, Beyond Bias and Barriers:  
Fulfilling the Potential of Women in Academic Science
and Engineering, finds significant evidence of 
continued gender inequality in the upper echelons 
of academia. The study found the ratio of women to men decreases 
at each promotional period throughout the academic career starting
with postdoctoral scholars (0.45:1), associate professors (0.35:1), 
and finally full professorships (0.2:1) at America’s top research institutions.
There are numerous beliefs used to rationalize inequality in the 
sciences—“women are not as good in mathematics as men,” “women
don’t want jobs in academia,” or “women are more interested in 
family than in careers.” The study evaluates these social beliefs and 
points out the fallacy of them. For example, it found female success 
in high school and college levels equal to male success in the sciences.
Also in 2003, a greater percentage of women reported plans 
of postdoctoral research in academic positions than men (26.6% of 
women compared with 22.2% of men).
In response to the study, Rep. Eddie Bernice Johnson, a Democrat 
from the 30th congressional district in Texas, introduced a bill (H.R. 
3514) in September 2007 to eliminate gender bias in scientific, engineering,
mathematics, and technological professions. The legisla-
tion, if passed, will create mandatory workshops focusing on gender 
issues to be attended by grant review panel members, university department
chairs, and officers of the following agencies: the National 
Institutes of Health, Department of Energy, Department of Defense, 
National Science Foundation, and National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration. The bill also allocates funding for an audit of universities
and other institutions of higher education, evaluating their 
compliance with current antidiscrimination laws. 
ASA, CSSA, and SSSA have signed on to a letter in support of 
H.R. 3514 (see www.agronomy.org/shared/pdfs/hr-3514-letter-ofsupport-101607.pdf).
The Women in Agronomy, Crops, Soils, and 
Environmental Sciences have also agreed to review the bill and 
offer crucial input in shaping the final draft. Not only will they be 
able to supply their invaluable input, but their actions will place 
ASA–CSSA–SSSA as leaders in addressing gender bias in academe—thereby
thwarting the misconception that women do not 
play an active role in the agricultural and environmental sciences.
B. Fricks, Science Policy Intern, Washington, DC.
 1 CSA News V52 N12 December 2007 
so
c
ie
ty
 &
 p
o
li
c
y
 N
ew
s
According to the Energy Infor-mation Administration (EIA) at the Department of Energy, 
the national average cost of gasoline 
is up five cents from last week at 
$2.87 per gallon; this is a 65-cent increase
compared with last year (EIA, 
2007b). Consumers are not only feeling
the crunch at the pump, but as 
winter descends upon us, we are all 
expected to see increased heating 
costs. The EIA predicts that the cost 
of all heating fuels will be higher 
this winter, based primarily on 
strong worldwide demand for crude 
oil coupled with low surplus production
capacity and weak petroleum 
inventories (EIA, 2007a). The upward 
trend of fuel costs adds kindling to 
the fire for increased domestic energy
production.
Drilling on Federal Public Lands
There is a long-standing battle 
between drilling advocates and land 
conservationists over the benefits 
and costs of oil and gas drilling on 
federal public lands. A scientific inventory
of oil and gas resources on 
federal lands conducted by the Department
of Interior estimated that 
on the 99.2 million acres surveyed 
there is 20.6 billion barrels of recoverable
oil and 182 trillion cubic feet 
of natural gas (Departments of Interior,
Agriculture, and Energy, 2006). 
Drilling supporters seem more interested
in the coastal plain region of 
the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge 
(ANWR) than any other federal land. 
While the 95-million acre National 
Wildlife Refuge System is managed 
specifically for the conservation 
and restoration of wildlife, plants, 
and their habitat, the potential oil 
reserves in the coastal plain seem 
to trump the mission of the refuge 
system.  
The mean estimate of “economically
recoverable” oil is 7.7 billion 
barrels, converting into approximately
a six-month supply of oil over 
the course of about 50 years with 
no oil being available for a decade. 
Proponents state that new recovery 
technologies will limit the negative 
environmental impacts and leave a 
“footprint” on the region of less than 
2,000 acres. The more environmentally
friendly drilling operations rely in 
large part on ice technologies, which 
may soon become infeasible as the 
warming trends in the arctic continue.
An environmental impact as-
sessment conducted by the U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service stated that the 
“Arctic Refuge is the only conservation
system unit that protects, in an 
undisturbed condition, a complete 
spectrum of the arctic ecosystems in 
North America” (U.S. Department of 
the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service,
Geological Survey, and Bureau 
of Land Management, 1987).
ANWR Legislation
In the 109th Congress, ANWR 
oil development was added to the 
conference report for the Defense appropriations
bill; however, the title 
was removed in the Senate after it 
failed a cloture motion. The fiscal 
year 2007 budget resolution also included
language to open ANWR for 
oil development, but the legislation 
was never enacted. In this Congress, 
President Bush included revenues 
from the opening of ANWR in his 
2008 budget, and this language will 
most likely be included in the President’s
2009 budget.  
Enacting legislation to protect the 
coastal plain from oil and gas development
might be just as conten-
tious as preventing it. Congressman 
Ed Markey (D-MA) along with 145 
co-sponsors introduced legislation 
(H.R. 39) to designate the coastal 
plain as wilderness at the beginning 
of this congressional session, and a 
similar bill is expected within the 
Senate. The House legislation has 
been referred to 
the House Natural 
Resources Committee
and is pending further ac-
tion. Wilderness designation would 
prohibit energy development unless
there were pre-existing mineral 
rights or Congress specifically allows 
it or reverses the designation. Opponents
to drilling in ANWR hope that 
if wilderness legislation were enacted,
reversal would be a large task 
to take. In a time when oil shortages 
are eminent, this parcel of land will 
come under increasing scrutiny.  
References
Departments of Interior, Agriculture, 
and Energy. 2006. Scientific inventory 
of onshore federal lands’ oil and gas 
resources and the extent and nature 
of restrictions or impediments to their 
development [Online]. Available at 
www.blm.gov/epca/ (accessed on 1 
Nov. 2007). Departments of Interior, 
Agriculture, and Energy, Washington, 
DC. 
[EIA] Energy Information Administration.
2007a. Short-term energy and 
winter fuels outlook [Online].  Available
at www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/steo/
pub/contents.html (accessed on 1 
Nov. 2007). EIA, Washington, DC.
[EIA] Energy Information Administration.
2007b. U.S. retail gasoline prices 
[Online]. Available at www.eia.doe.
gov/oil_gas/petroleum/data_publications/wrgp/mogas_home_page.html
(accessed on 1 Nov. 2007). EIA, Wash-
ington, DC.
U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and 
Wildlife Service, Geological Survey, 
and Bureau of Land Management. 
1987. Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, 
Alaska, coastal plain resource assessment.
Report and recommendation to 
the Congress of the United States and 
final legislative environmental impact 
statement. U.S. Department of the Interior,
Fish and Wildlife Service, Geo-
logical Survey, and Bureau of Land 
Management, Washington, DC.
Congressional Science Fellow Report
Balancing Act: Rising Oil Prices and Conservation
by Marcy E. Gallo
M.E. Gallo, Congressional Science Fellow, 
Washington, DC
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 1
s
o
c
iety &
 p
o
lic
y N
ew
s
In Memoriam
Francis Clark
Dr. Francis E. Clark, born on 4 
Mar. 1910 in Fairbury, NE, peacefully 
left this scientific world on 31 Aug. 
2007. He was preceded in death by 
his wife Evelyn and is survived by 
son Lowell, daughter Linda, and two 
grandchildren. 
He received a Ph.D. in microbiology
and biochemistry from Uni-
versity of Colorado–Boulder
in 
1936. Clark served 
in the U.S. Army 
from 1943–1946 
and worked for 40 
years for USDAARS,
retiring in 
1976. His distinguished
career 
involved another 20 years of consultative
research, society service, and 
textbook writing. His faculty affiliations
included Kansas State Univer-
sity, Texas Technological University, 
Southern Methodist University, 
Iowa State University, and Colorado 
State University. He served as editor
and co-editor of numerous SSSA 
and other scientific monographs 
and professional journals and as the 
American vice president of the sixth 
ISSS Congress. His co-authorship 
with E.A. Paul in 1989 and 1996 for 
the first and second editions of the 
Soil Microbiology and Biochemistry 
textbook, in addition to his supervision
of students, kept him at the 
forefront of leadership in his field for 
a total of 60 years. Amongst his numerous
contributions to the scientific 
community were 10 international 
assignments with agencies such as 
UNESCO, NATO, IBP, FAO, and the 
Fulbright Scholarship Program. 
The establishment of the Francis 
Clark Soil Biology Scholarship at 
Colorado State University’s Natural 
Resource Ecology Laboratory and 
the Francis E. Clark Soil Biology Lectureship
at the SSSA Annual Meet-
ing ensures that his contributions to 
science and society will continue for 
many years in the future.
Elizabeth Sulzman
Dr. Elizabeth Sulzman, associate 
professor in the Department of Crop 
and Soil Science at Oregon State University,
died on 10 June 2007. 
Sulzman lived life fully. She was a 
radiant person who touched the lives 
of all whom she met. Her collegiality, 
dynamic personality, and infectious 
enthusiasm for active learning and 
scientific inquiry 
were her hallmarks.
Sulzman was 
recognized as a 
master teacher by 
her peers locally, 
regionally, and nationally.
She is re-
membered for her 
enthusiasm and bringing soil science 
“to life” for her students. Her goal 
was to make courses challenging, 
useful, and enjoyable. Sulzman enlivened
her class lectures with stories 
from places where she had worked 
and studied soils. 
She inspired students in her classes
to think of soils as part of their 
everyday lives and, for some, as a 
possible career. Sulzman inspired the 
graduate students with whom she 
taught to make teaching a significant 
part of their professional lives. 
Sulzman was active in ASA and 
SSSA as associate editor for the Journal
of Natural Resources and Life Sci-
ences Education, chair of the Soil Science
Education Award Committee, 
and member of the General Awards 
Committee.
She is survived by her husband 
James and daughter Serita.
Contributions can be made to the 
“Elizabeth Sulzman Memorial Fund” 
for a trust or college fund for Serita 
and sent to Barbara Reed, 107 Crop 
Science Building, OSU, Corvallis, OR 
97331-3002.
Harry W. Trask
Harry W. Trask, 82, Lyman, ME, 
passed away on 16 Aug. 2007. He 
was born in Fort Fairfield, ME on 
4 Mar. 1925, the son of Warren W. 
and Katie Maude Victoria Wiggins 
Trask. 
He was a radio operator in the 
South Pacific as a member of the U.S. 
Navy Air Corps. After his service, 
he entered the University of Maine 
in Orono and received B.S. and M.S. 
degrees in agronomy.
Trask was the Cumberland Country
Agricultural Extension Agent in 
Portland in the early 1950s before he 
returned to Aroostook County where 
he was employed by the HI-Test 
Fertilizer Company in Presque Isle. 
In 1962, he moved to Massachusetts 
where he worked for the Arthur D. 
Little Company as a consultant specializing
in pesticides and fertilizers. 
In 1977, Trask began working for the 
Environmental Protection Agency 
in Washington, DC and retired to 
Goodwin Mills, ME in 1980 where he 
did private consulting.
Trask was a member of the 
Presque Isle Rotary Club and Toastmasters
Club, the Lyman-Dayton 
Lions Club, and the Conservation 
Commission in Lyman. 
Survivors include his wife of 61 
years, Edna Thompson Trask of Lyman;
one son, Alan B. Trask and 
wife Charlie of Ft. Collins, CO; and 
three daughters, Sara Trask Perny 
and husband Elliott of Maitland, FL, 
Debra Trask Greene and husband 
Joseph of Belmont, MA, and Donna 
Trask Hanscom and husband Vincent
of West Swanzey, NH. He is also 
survived by two brothers, Oscar J. 
Trask of Virginia and John Trask of 
Easton. He also leaves five grandchildren,
one great-grandchild, and 
17 nieces and nephews. He is predeceased
by a brother, William Trask, 
in 1950 and a sister, Elizabeth Trask 
Corey, in 2003. 
 20 CSA News  V52 N12 December 2007
so
c
ie
ty
 &
 p
o
li
c
y
 N
ew
s
Business & People
Colorado State University
Three graduates of the Department of Soil and Crop 
Sciences were recipients of the Colorado State University 
(CSU) Honor Alum Award at a ceremony and luncheon 
in September. 
Dr. KEN VOGEL received a B.S. and M.S. from CSU in 
1965 and 1967. Following service as an officer in the Navy, 
he received a Ph.D. from University of Nebraska (UNL) 
in 1974. Currently Vogel is a research geneticist and research
leader with USDA-ARS and is adjunct professor of 
agronomy and horticulture at UNL. His primary research 
is breeding and genetics of introduced and native grasses 
and associated management. Since 1990 he has researched 
switchgrass as a biomass energy crop. Vogel is a Fellow 
of ASA, CSSA, and the American Association for the Advancement
of Science. 
Donna Norwood Souther received a B.S. in agronomy 
in 1980 from CSU, a juris doctor degree from University 
of Colorado in 1984, 
and M.A. from University
of Northern 
Colorado in 1999. In 
1996, she was selected
as Academic Dean 
at Aims Community 
college (ACC) in 
Greeley, CO and in 
2006 was appointed 
Chief Academic Officer
and Executive 
Dean at ACC. Souther
has received many 
awards, including 
ACC’s Administrator
of the Year. 
Col. Gordon Simmons
received a B.S. 
in 1943 from CSU. 
He then embarked 
on a distinguished military career, serving in both WWII 
and the Korean War. Following the wars, he and his wife 
purchased a home and developed a productive vegetable 
and fruit farm. Gordon has been strongly committed to 
education. He served on the Missoula, MT School Board 
for 25 years and on the Montana State Council of Vocational
Education. 
Golam University
Dr. ADAM KHAN, associate professor at State University
of New York at Morrisville, worked this summer on a 
project funded by the Ministry of Labor of Government of 
Pakistan. Located about 16 km south of Dera Ismail Khan, 
the 400 ha of land was used to grow wheat and rice as well 
as a few date palm trees. Khan has also written a grant 
proposal of $2.5 million to the Higher Education Commission
to establish a date palm research and commercial 
production center. Similarly, he applied for another grant 
to establish a fish research and commercial production 
center. Some of the pictures taken at Gomal University 
can be viewed as a slide presentation on Dr. Khan’s web 
page: http://people.morrisville.edu/~khana. 
Irrigation Association
Brent Mecham, a Colorado water conservation specialist
and longtime irrigation instructor, has been named the 
Irrigation Association’s industry development director. 
Mecham will lead the Irrigation Association Education 
Foundation and guide the effort to streamline curriculum 
development. “Brent has tremendous respect in the irrigation
industry and beyond,” says Irrigation Association 
Executive Director Deborah Hamlin. “By all accounts, he 
is a great instructor, an authority on irrigation best practices,
and a passionate advocate of irrigation efficiency. 
He is a distinguished addition to the IA staff.” 
Mississippi State University
Longtime Mississippi State University (MSU) administrator
VANCE H. WATSON is now formally director 
of MSU Extension and Outreach, a position he has held 
on an interim basis since 2005. During his 41-year career, 
Watson has held successively responsible positions, including
vice president of the Division of Agriculture, For-
estry, and Veterinary Medicine; director of the Mississippi 
Agricultural and Forestry Experiment Station; and dean 
of the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. A Missouri 
native, Watson began his tenure at the land grant institution
in 1966 as an assistant professor of agronomy.
The Ohio State University
Ohio State turfgrass science student Ian Gallagher was 
named the 2006–2007 James B. Beard Outstanding Senior. 
Originally from Toledo, OH, Gallagher has excelled in the 
OSU turfgrass science program and was recognized for 
exhibiting characteristics reflective of OSU alumnus Dr. 
JAMES BEARD. These characteristics include strong leadership
qualities and integrity, commitment to academics 
and the turfgrass profession, and willingness to mentor 
other students. Besides a strong academic background, 
Gallagher has extensive experience including an internship
at Carton House Golf Club in Ireland during 2006. 
He was a member of the OSU Turfgrass Scholastic Team, 
an officer in the OSU Turfgrass Management Club, and 
has served as mentor and role model for many students in 
the turf program. He received the Trans-Mississippi Turfgrass
Scholarship, was named a Golf Course Superinten-
Receiving the Honor Alum Award 
from Colorado State University’s Department
of Soil and Crop Sciences 
are Ken Vogel and Donna Souther. 
Not pictured is Gordon Simmons.
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 21
s
o
c
iety &
 p
o
lic
y N
ew
s
dents Association of America Scholar, received a scholarship
from the Ohio Turfgrass Foundation, and was named 
an American Society for Horticultural Science Collegiate 
Scholar. Gallagher, who graduated in June 2007, accepted 
an assistant superintendent position at Hyde Park Country
Club in Cincinnati, OH. Previous recipients of the 
James B. Beard Outstanding Senior Award include Adam 
Alt, Stephanie Heston, Brad Novotny, Scott Pavalko, and 
Christina Todd.
Oklahoma State University
DAVID R. PORTER has been appointed head of the 
Division of Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources’ 
Department of Plant and Soil Sciences at Oklahoma State 
University (OSU). Dr. Porter served as research leader and 
supervisory research geneticist of the Wheat, Peanut, and 
Other Field Crops Unit of USDA-ARS in Stillwater. He 
initially joined USDA-ARS in 1990 as a research geneticist. 
Over the years, Porter has held adjunct assistant, associate, 
and full professor positions with the OSU Department of 
Plant and Soil Sciences. Porter is a member of ASA, CSSA, 
the Hard Winter Wheat Improvement Committee, and 
the Southwestern Wheat Research and Education Consortium.
He received a B.S. and M.S. in agronomy from OSU 
in 1981 and 1983 and Ph.D. in agronomy from Texas Tech 
University in 1990. Porter served in the U.S. Marine Corps 
from 1973–1977, attaining the rank of sergeant.
Texas A&M University
Dr. YOUJUN DENG recently joined the Texas A&M 
University Soil and Crop Sciences faculty as an assistant 
professor of soil/clay mineralogy. He received a Ph.D. 
from Texas A&M; M.S. from Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Nanjing, China; 
and B.S. from Huazhong Agricultural 
University, Wuhan, China. Deng’s research
focus is molecular mechanisms 
of soil/clay mineral transformation under
various natural and anthropogenic 
conditions and reactions of soil/clay 
minerals with natural and synthetic 
organic, inorganic, and biological compounds
with environmental and indus-
trial importance. He will also be teaching soil mineralogy 
to graduate students.
Dr. AMBIKA CHANDRA now serves as assistant professor
and turf breeder at the Dallas 
Research and Extension Center. She 
received a Ph.D. from Penn State and 
M.S. and B.S. degrees from Punjab Agricultural
University of India. Her ma-
jor research focus is to establish and 
operate an applied molecular marker 
laboratory at the Dallas Center to identify
genes and associated genetic mark-
ers in major turf species for traits like 
tolerance to water stress, extreme temperatures, and resistance
to insects and pathogens. In addition, her interests 
include undertaking a functional genomics approach to 
identify genes and proteins from grasses whose differential
expression patterns under normal and stressed condi-
tions can be correlated with a plant’s ability to respond 
and adapt to environmental challenges.
Dr. AMIR IBRAHIM was appointed associate professor,
small grains breeder, in the Soil 
and Crop Sciences Department at Texas 
A&M. He received a Ph.D. from Colorado
State University, M.S. from the 
American University of Beirut, and 
B.S. from University of Gezira, Wad 
Medani, Sudan. Ibrahim’s research 
program will target the development, 
adaptation, and strategic deployment 
of new winter wheat and oat cultivars 
for Texas, with emphasis in East, South, 
and Central Texas. He will also be team teaching experimental
designs in agriculture to graduate students in the 
department.
USDA-ARS
DONG WANG is the new research leader of the Water 
Management Research Unit at USDA-ARS San Joaquin 
Valley Agricultural Sciences Center, Parlier, CA. Dr. Wang 
received a Ph.D. in soil science from University of Wisconsin
and M.S. in agricultural engineering from University 
of Idaho. He was previously a tenured faculty member at 
University of Minnesota.
Plan for Your Year-End ASF Gift
Consider Making a Donation
Thank you to all of the donors who have supported
the Agronomic Science Foundation during 
the past year. Please consider making a year-end gift 
to ASF. Development Officer Paul Kamps can answer 
questions about giving: call 608-268-4975 or email 
pkamps@agronomy.org. Those who make a year-end 
contribution of $100 or more will receive a complimentary
copy of the American Society of Agronomy: 
100 Years of History book and CD while supplies last. 
Several ways to give include:
 Online donation form at www.a-s-f.org
 Mail a check to ASF, 677 S. Segoe Rd., Madison, 
WI, 53711-1086
Smithsonian Soils Exhibit Opens 19 July
The soils exhibit, Dig It! The Secrets of Soil, will 
open to the public on Saturday, 19 July at the National
Museum of Natural History. To learn more or 
make a gift, visit: www.soils.org/smithsonian.
•
•
Amir Ibrahim
Youjun Deng
Ambika Chandra
 22 CSA News V52 N12 December 2007 
so
c
ie
ty
 &
 p
o
li
c
y
 N
ew
s
Membership
Welcome New Members
The Societies welcome the following 
individuals as new members who joined 
ASA–CSSA–SSSA in October 2007:
Australia
Li, Yong, Parkville, VIC
Belgium
Colinet, Gilles F., Gembloux
Canada
Dube, Stephane, Prince George, BC
Bagavathiannan, Muthukumar V., 
Winnipeg, MB
Rekhi, Harjit Singh, Brampton, ON
Pfeffer, Adam, Guelph, ON
Koseva, Ina Svetlinova, 
Peterborough, ON
China
He, nian peng, Beijing
Germany
Hansen, Dana E., Brandenburg an 
der Havel
Greece
Terzopulos, Panayiotis John, Athens
Japan
Ahmad, Zahoor, Tottori
Norway
Shrestha, Bharat M., Aas
Pakistan
Khan, Shad, Peshawar, NWFP
Husnain, Tayyab, Lahore, Punjab
Abid, Muhammad, Multan, Punjab
Spain
Vanderlinden, Karl E., Alcalá del Río 
Switzerland
Peter, Roland, Lindau
United States
Sangireddy, Sasikiran R., Normal, AL
Kuroishi, Shuichi, Fatetteville, AR
Bond, William, Fayetteville, AR
Jones, Samantha E., Fayetteville, AR
Maschmann, Elliot, Fayetteville, AR
Orazaly, Moldir, Fayetteville, AR
Sheets, Steven, Little Rock, AR
Andrade-Sanchez, Pedro, Maricopa, 
AZ
Norton, Randall, Safford, AZ
Morgan, Russell Lewis, Arroyo 
Grande, CA
Quist, Matthew, Atascadero, CA
Miller, Gretchen R., Berkeley, CA
Porras, Rachel Catherine, Berkeley, 
CA
Marin-Spiotta, Erika, El Cerrito, CA
James, Allan, Linden, CA
Freese, Robert Carl, Los Angeles, CA
Pontedeiro, Elizabeth May, 
Riverside, CA
Twarakavi, Navin K., Riverside, CA
Bedore, Paul, Stanford, CA
Wilson, Margaret, Fort Collins, CO
Johnson, Gordon Charles, Dover, DE
Larsen, Nicholas A., Canal Point, FL
Adiku, Samuel Godfried Kwasi, 
Gainesville, FL
Tidyman, Thomas R., Gainesville, FL
Bays, James Stanley, Tampa, FL
Toledo, Mike, Tampa, FL
Seader, Kathleen J., Athens, GA
Luke, John Kevin, Valdosta, GA
Diarra, Aminata Sidibe, Honolulu, 
HI
Konare, Hamidou, Honolulu, HI
McClellan, Amanda Tai, Honolulu, 
HI
Querido, Antonio L., Honolulu, HI
Baune, Sarah A., Ames, IA
Gailans, Stefan R., Ames, IA
Mechem, Nicholas M., Ames, IA
Schnur, Nathan W., Ames, IA
Parrott, Benjamin, Carroll, IA
Kluesner, Scott P., Farley, IA
Tindle, Sean Robert, Guttenberg, IA
Schwartz, David H., Harlan, IA
Bowden, Nickolas, Humboldt, IA
Kjaersgaard, Jeppe H., Kimberly, ID
Winter, Jericho Maegan, DeKalb, IL
Spratt, Robert M., LeRoy, IL
Martin, Clint, Peoria, IL
Bubert, Jessica M., Roscoe, IL
Ankrom, Zachariah J., Sycamore, IL
Abou Najm, Majdi Rafic, West 
Lafayette, IN
Zhao, Chun, West Lafayette, IN
Woosley, Paul B., Bowling Green, KY
Abner, Jeffrey D., Centertown, KY
Sawyers, Jordan Z., Hardin, KY
Roberts, John A., Henderson, KY
Cropper, Kenneth, Lexington, KY
Deaton, Michael, Lexington, KY
Lewis, Ricky, Lexington, KY
Moser, Casey J., Madisonville, KY
Hightower, Bryn L., Murray, KY
Skinner, John, Murray, KY
Dame, Curtis L., Rumsey, KY
Badigannavar, Ashok, Baton Rouge, 
LA
Lattao, Charisma, Baton Rouge, LA
Ordonez, Samuel Agbayani, Baton 
Rouge, LA
Sahoo, Diptimayee, Baton Rouge, LA
Sweeney, Jeffrey S., Annapolis, MD
Doraiswamy, Paul, Beltsville, MD
Kuykendall, L. David, Beltsville, MD
White, John W., Beltsville, MD
Fisher, Kala R., Alexandria, MN
Slinden, Jonathan L., Grove City, MN
Kosbau, Nathan L., Little Falls, MN
Bastyr, Erin L., Lonsdale, MN
Brown, Justin, Minneapolis, MN
Keith, Trevor J., Minneapolis, MN
Pradhananga, Amit K., Minneapolis, 
MN
Hemmesch, Jacob, Owatonna, MN
Helgeson, Scott E., Rose Creek, MN
Dotseth, Andrew T., St. Cloud, MN
Hayman, Michael D., St. Cloud, MN
Albrecht, Jacob J., St. Paul, MN
Clark, Matthew D., St. Paul, MN
Duxbury, Travis K., St. Paul, MN
Huneke, Marc P., St. Paul, MN
Lever, Pat L., St. Paul, MN
Roberts, Daniel S., St. Paul, MN
Messner, Carl Gene, Albany, MO
McLaren, James S., Chesterfield, MO
Priest, Sean M., Fairview, MO
McKibben, Michael Lyle, Kansas 
City, MO
Jungermann, Rachel A., Moscow 
Mills, MO
Lee, Kevin D., Nevada, MO
Wisner, Daniel C., Osceola, MO
Rapp, Chris C., Rockville, MO
Rapp, Nick W., Schell City, MO
Detar, Ben D., Springfield, MO
Lanz, Christopher A., Springfield, 
MO
Brooks, John P., Mississippi State, MS
Seepaul, Ramdeo, Mississippi State, 
MS
Wu, Jixiang, Mississippi State, MS
Yates, Kerry S., Great Falls, MT
Grimestad, Garry, Missoula, MT
Rees, Richard T., Durham, NC
Erichsen, Jens, Garner, NC
Connor, Connie L., Greensboro, NC
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 2
s
o
c
iety &
 p
o
lic
y N
ew
s
Dong, Xiuli, Greensboro, NC
Burkey, Kent O., Raleigh, NC
Knies, Sara, Raleigh, NC
Smith, Tim A., Windsor, NC
Fiebig, Mary-Anne, Fargo, ND
Neate, Stephen, Fargo, ND
Janssen, Michael R., Hooper, NE
Hultquist, Joe H., Minden, NE
Bargen, Brad D., Nelson, NE
Shi, Xun, Hanover, NH
Crouch, Joanne, New Brunswick, NJ
Roberts, Joseph Anthony, New Brunswick, 
NJ
Schaaf, Michael, Las Cruces, NM
Gardner, Jennifer, Brooktondale, NY
Nunez, Jessica, Morrisville, NY
Collins, David, Oneida, NY
Studzinska, Aneta Karolina, Columbus, 
OH
Sidick, Melissa, Powell, OH
Mukome, Fungai, Portland, OR
Ranck, Rebecca Dawn, Rheems, PA
Oxner, John W., Lexington, SC
Sherrill, James N., Collinwood, TN
Hopper, Holly L., Hornbeak, TN
Kauffman, John M., Knoxville, TN
Slaughter, Lindsey C., Lyles, TN
Connor, James E., Martin, TN
Davis, Hannah E., Martin, TN
Hagewood, Beth, Newbern, TN
Holt, Sarah L., Rives, TN
Wann, Dylan Quincy, Abilene, TX
Roberts, Galen R., Brownfield, TX
Gutierrez, Miguel Angel, College Station, 
TX
Navarrete, Ronald Jose, College Station, 
TX
Henderson, James Bruce, Corpus Christi, 
TX
Griffin, John, Devers, TX
Cave, Justin W., Lubbock, TX
Chen, Junping, Lubbock, TX
Griffin, Christopher L., Lubbock, TX
Layton, Lance E., Lubbock, TX
Muennink, Emmett A., Lubbock, TX
Stokes, Benjamin, Lubbock, TX
Parker, Jon Paul, San Angelo, TX
Mueck, Joe Paul, Taylor, TX
Hanks, Dallas, Logan, UT
Darby, Brian James, Burlington, VT
Fuerst, E. Patrick, Pullman, WA
Lloyd, Daniel T., Madison, WI
Reyerson, Paul Eric, Madison, WI
Parr, Bryan J.D., Platteville, WI
Otto, Andrew P., Princeton, WI
Gasch-Salava, Caley, Laramie, WY
Mbugwa, Gatuawa, Laramie, WY
Promoting A Modern Image of Soil Science
The article by Dr. Lal in the September CSA News, “Raising the Profile
of Soil Science Professions,” is very timely, appropriate, and sorely 
needed. I am increasingly concerned that the perspective of soil science 
students regarding career opportunities is too narrow, based on my experience
with them during my 35-year career as a professor of soil sci-
ence and after retirement. 
Many young graduates seem to limit themselves and have not explored
the avenues of exciting opportunities outside of traditional routes. 
They do not realize that their education, training, and research capabilities
and their ability to produce and soundly evaluate data equips them 
to contribute to a broad variety of enterprises not ordinarily considered 
by soil scientists. Industrial, business, and government employers are 
not fully aware of the broad nature of contributions our students offer 
their enterprises.
I have several recommendations that might enhance the perspective of 
both students and managers. First, the excellent ASA brochures dealing 
with career diversity should be included with each resume to employers
to stimulate awareness of the breadth of experience and potential of 
our profession to meet a wide variety of emerging needs in our societies. 
These brochures should be enhanced and extended with a more complete 
description of qualifications and skills. Likewise, we need to highlight 
successful cooperative efforts addressing critical world problems by soil 
scientists in journals outside of our discipline and in the public media. 
Administrators of agricultural schools should require each graduate to 
attend a seminar of important issues, disciplines, and career opportunities
for soil scientists to consider. These seminars should be taught by 
creative and knowledgeable faculty in conjunction with representatives 
from industrial, business, and consultive firms.
Our students possess a priceless combination of youth, strength, 
knowledge, intelligence, and exuberance as well as education and experience.
We, as educators, must assure that students are aware of their 
full potential as soil scientists to contribute to a wide variety of socially 
relevant emerging opportunities. As this occurs, I believe that this modern
image of ourselves as soil scientists will be elevated.
—Dr. Eugene Brams, Texas A&M University System (retired) 
and emeritus ASA and SSSA member.
Journal Archives Will Be Available Online Soon
The complete archives of Agronomy Journal, Crop Science,
Journal of Environmental Quality, and Soil Science 
Society of America Journal will be available with your 
online member journal subscription at the end of January.
The archive will be fully searchable. Be sure to 
renew your subscription today and request that your 
library does the 
same to access this 
valuable resource.
Letter to the Editor
 Calendar
2 CSA News V52 N12 December 2007
so
c
ie
ty
 &
 p
o
li
c
y
 N
ew
s
Other Meetings
USA/Territories
2007
2–4 December, 2007 National Fusarium Head Blight Forum, 
Kansas City, MO; www.scabusa.org/forum07.html
4–5 December, Pest Resistance Management Workshop, Lincoln,
NE; www.agronomy.unl.edu/prospective/distanceed.
html or cdickinson2@unl.edu
9–11 December, 28th International Irrigation Show, San Diego, 
CA; www.irrigation.org
9–12 December, Entomological Society of America Annual
Meeting, San Diego, CA; www.entsoc.org/annual_ 
meeting/index.htm 
12–13 December, Gene Flow among Transgenic Plants and 
Their Wild Relatives: Implications for Risk Assessment, St. 
Louis, MO; www.ncwss.org/meeting/2007/GeneFlow.htm
12–14 December, 2007 National Soybean Rust Symposium, 
Louisville, KY; www.apsnet.org/online/sbr/
2008
26–31 January, Joint American Forage and Grassland Council 
and Society for Range Management Annual Meeting, Louisville,
KY; www.rangelands.org/events.shtml
31 January–1 February, Symposium on Emerging Chemicals in 
Soil and Groundwater: Detection, Analysis, and Remediation,
Tampa, FL; keith.hoddinott@apg.amedd.army.mil
4–5 February, 2008 National Alfalfa Symposium, Kearney, NE; 
www.hayandforage.com
4–7 February, Weed Science Society of America Annual Meeting,
Chicago, IL; www.wssa.net/
21–22 February, Agricultural Outlook Forum 2008, Arlington, 
VA; www.usda.gov/oce/forum
12–13 March, Southern Soybean Disease Workers Annual 
Meeting, Pensacola, FL; http://cipm.ncsu.edu/ent/SSDW/
20–22 March, 7th Biennial Conference on University Education
in Natural Resources, Corvallis, OR; http://uenr. 
forestry.oregonstate.edu/index.htm
25–27 March, SARE National Conference, Kansas City, MO; 
www.sare.org
2–4 April, 2008 Humic Science and Technology Conference 
Eleven, Northeastern University, Boston, MA; www.hagroup.
neu.edu or e.ghabbour@neu.edu
18–21 May, 99th AOCS Annual Meeting and Expo, Seattle, WA; 
www.aocs.org/meetings or meetings@aocs.org
10–12 June, CIMR—Climate Information for Managing Risks: 
Partnerships and Solutions for Agriculture and Natural Resources,
St. Pete Beach, FL; www.conference.ifas.ufl.edu/
cimr/ 
13–20 June, XXVII International Workshop/Symposium on 
Rapid Methods and Automation in Microbiology, Manhattan,
KS; www.dce.ksu.edu/conf/rapidmethods
22–26 June, 11th North American Forest Soils Conference, 
Blacksburg, VA; www.cpe.vt.edu/nafsc/
26–27 June, ASTM International Symposium on Salinization 
of Soil: Causes, Impacts, and Remediation, Denver, CO; 
keith.hoddinott@us.army.mil 
28 June–2 July, 8th International Oat Conference, Minneapolis, 
MN; stuth001@umn.edu
ASA–CSSA–SSSA 
International Annual Meetings
2008
5–9 October, Houston, TX (Joint Meeting with the Geological 
Society of America and Gulf Coast Association of Geological
Societies) 
2009
1–5 November, Pittsburgh, PA
2010
31 October–4 November, Long Beach, CA
2011
14–20 October, San Antonio, TX
Branch, Chapter Meetings
2008
15–20 June, Western Society of Crop Science Meeting—in 
conjunction with AAAS, Pacific Division, Waimea, HI; 
www.crops.org/branches/western/
13–16 July, Joint Meeting of the Canadian Societies of 
Agronomy and Horticultural Science and the Northeastern
Branch of ASA–CSSA–SSSA, Montreal, QC, Canada; 
www.agronomycanada.com/events.html
Society-Sponsored Symposia, Conferences
2007
3–7 December, International Seminar on Soils under Notillage
Systems in the Tropics, Antananarivo, Madagas-
car; madagascar@ird.fr 
2008
13–18 April, 5th International Crop Science Congress, Jeju, 
Korea; www.cropscience2008.com
19–22 April, International Symposium on Crop Modeling 
and Decision Support, Nanjing China; www.klia.cn/ 
iscmds/ or Greg.McMaster@ars.usda.gov  
*19 July, Dig It! The Secrets of Soil Public Exhibit Opening, 
National Museum of Natural History, Washington, DC; 
www.soils.org/smithsonian
*New listing this month.
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 25
s
o
c
iety &
 p
o
lic
y N
ew
s
*20–23 July, 9th International Conference on Precision Agriculture,
Denver, CO; www.icpaonline.org/
28–31 July, 1st International Conference on Hydropedology, 
University Park, PA; http://hydropedology.psu.edu/
3–7 August, 35th Annual Meeting of the Plant Growth Regulation
Society of America, San Francisco, CA; www.pgrsa.
org or mwf@uckac.edu
14–18 September, Harlan II: An International Symposium—
Biodiversity in Agriculture: Domestication, Evolution, and 
Sustainability, Davis, CA; http://harlanii.ucdavis.edu/ 
index.htm or abdamania@ucdavis.edu
2009
*14–20 June, XVI International Nitrogen Fixation Congress, 
Big Sky, MT; john.peters@chemistry.montana.edu
International
2007
5–7 December, Potassium and Magnesium: Advances in Research
and Application, Cambridge, UK; www.fertiliser- 
society.org or www.ipipotash.org
2008
5–8 February, 1st Global Workshop on High Resolution Digital
Soil Sensing and Mapping, Sydney, Australia; www.
digitalsoilmapping.org/2008/DSM_2008.html or r.viscarrarossel@usyd.edu.au
17–19 February, Phosphates 2008 International Conference 
and Exhibition, Paris, France; www.britishsulphurevents.
com/conferences_phos.htm
*1–4 April, Uplands 2008: International Symposium on Interdependencies
between Upland and Lowland Agriculture 
and Resource Management, Stuttgart, Germany; www.unihohenheim.de/uplands2008
23–25 April, 2nd Workshop on Lysimeters for Global Change 
Research: Biological Processes and the Environmental Fate 
of Pollutants, Neuherberg, Germany; www.gsf.de/lysimeterworkshop
23–27 June, 2008 International Weed Science Congress, Van-
couver, Canada; http://iws.ucdavis.edu/5intlweedcong.htm
29 June–5 July, XXI International Grassland Congress/VIII 
International Rangeland Congress, Huhhot, Inner Mongolia,
China; www.igc-irc2008.org or secretariat2008@hotmail.
com
30 June–4 July, IAMFE Denmark 2008—The 13th International 
Conference and Exhibition on Mechanization of Field Experiments,
Aarhus, Denmark; www.lr.dk/iamfe2008
6–10 July, Canadian Society of Soil Science Annual Meeting, 
Prince George, BC, Canada; www.res.unbc.ca/csss2008
24–29 August, EUROSOIL Congress 2008, Vienna, Austria; 
www.ecsss.net
26–28 August, IFOAM International Conference on Marketing
of Organic and Regional Values, Schwäbisch Hall, Ger-
many; www.ifoam.org/events/ifoam_conferences/regional_
values_2007.html
11–16 September, 13th International Conference on Soil Micromorphology,
Chengdu, China; http://icsm.imde.ac.cn/
18–22 September, 5th International Conference on Land Degradation,
Valenzano, Bari, Italy; www.iamb.it/5ICLD or 
pandi@iamb.it
1–6 October, 12th IACMAG Conference, Goa, India; 
www.12iacmag.com/
26–31 October, IV Silicon in Agriculture Conference, Wild 
Coast Sun, Port Edward, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa; www.
siliconconference.org.za
26–30 November, 5th ISMOM and 2nd Interconference Commission
2.5 IUSS–2008, Pucón, Chile; www.ismom2008ufro.
cl
Upcoming in 2008: The First International 
Conference on Hydropedology
Conference Theme—Water and Soil: Key to 
Sustaining the Earth’s Critical Zone
28–31 July 2008
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA USA
The goal of this inaugural international conference is to 
advance the emerging interdisciplinary field of hydropedology
and to promote its synergistic collaborations across 
scientific disciplines, including pedology, soil physics, 
hydrology, geomorphology, geology, ecology, and biogeochemistry.
Hydropedology aims at understanding and 
quantifying pedologic controls on hydrologic processes 
and properties and hydrologic impacts on soil formation, 
variability, and functions across space and time. It emphasizes
in situ soils in the landscape context where distinct 
pedogenic features, environmental variables, and anthropogenic
impacts interact and determine the landscape wa-
ter flux.
The specific objectives of this conference are to:
  take stock and analyze what has been accomplished 
so far in hydropedology and to identify where gaps 
are and how hydropedology can deliver unique contributions
to soil and water sciences;
  promote exciting breakthrough collaborations among 
soil science, hydrology, geomorphology, and other 
related bio- and geosciences communities, aiming at 
synergistic strategies for advancing one another; and 
  charter a roadmap for international collaboration to 
advance the frontiers of hydropedology and its contribution
to the Critical Zone science, including fun-
damental research, practical applications, and interdisciplinary
education and outreach.
Important Dates
  1 Feb. 2008: Abstract deadline
  1 Apr. 2008: Notification of abstract acceptance and 
presentation format and schedule
  1 May 2008: Early registration deadline
  28–31 July 2008: Conference at Penn State
For more information, see http://hydropedology.psu.edu
1.
2.
3.
•
•
•
•
 Education
2 CSA News V52 N12 December 2007 
In the southwestern U.S., climate variability strongly influences range conditions and thus is an important factor in range managers’ land management decisions. 
Access to cutting-edge climate and range science information
is vital for managers to make better short- and long-
term decisions. To engage land management practitioners 
and scientists in communicating about climate change 
and range science concepts, an experiential learning exercise
was implemented at a meeting of land managers and 
scientists in January 2006.
The main objective of the exercise was to challenge 
range managers to explore how long-term changes in 
temperature and precipitation regimes may impact their 
management strategies and how different planning windows
may be needed to adjust to changing climatic con-
ditions. Within a state and transition model framework, 
participants explored potential trajectories for rangeland 
management units under a changing climate. 
The exercise consisted of several rounds in which management
decisions needed to be selected based on situ-
ational and financial constraints and within given climate 
conditions. Groups of 5 to 10 individuals collectively managed
a 1,000-acre parcel of land given financial constraints 
and environmental disturbances determined by chance for 
six decision periods, representing 60 years. In each round, 
groups discussed potential changes to and transitions of 
their parcel based on the interaction among initial state, 
disturbances, and the decade-by-decade climate time 
series data provided. The groups enacted management 
strategies based on trying to keep the parcel in the current 
state or trying to move the parcel to a more favored state. 
The exercise was structured as an opportunity to explore 
the complexities inherent in range management decisions 
within the context of climate change at the small group 
level. The entire experiential learning exercise was run for 
1.5 hours; some groups finished in less time.
The value of the exercise was threefold. First, participants,
actively taking a role in management decisions, 
became more comfortable with the concepts of climate 
change and increased their awareness of the potential impacts
of long-term changes in temperature and precipita-
tion regimes on their management strategies. Second, the 
exercise significantly increased participants’ knowledge 
of and comfort working with state and transition models. 
Finally, involving land managers in a dialogue with scientists
increased both groups’ comfort levels with working 
together. 
“The two-way information exchange experienced at the 
workshop benefited both the presenting scientists and the 
attending land managers,” says Dr. Michael Crimmins, 
a climate extension specialist with the University of Arizona
Cooperative Extension and lead author of a recent 
article in the Journal of Natural Resources and Life Sciences 
Education describing the exercise. “This dialog allowed 
land managers to convey their needs for new applied research
and for scientists to better communicate existing 
research findings. This type of communication is critical 
to ensure that we are meeting the needs of land managers 
under a changing climate.”
Evaluation results indicated that the exercise was useful
in facilitating small-group discussions between scien-
tists and managers on the complex interactions between 
short-term climate variability, longer-term changes, and 
management decisions at all time scales. The exercise also 
served to identify strengths and weaknesses of the state 
and transition approach, highlighting information gaps 
for everyday decision making.
Though designed for use in semidesert grasslands in 
the southwestern United States, Crimmins says this exercise
could be adapted relatively easily for use in any part 
of the country. The adapted exercise is equally appropriate
for use by land managers or by undergraduate college 
classes studying land management issues. Crimmins says 
experiential learning is a more effective teaching method 
than expository instruction, as it fosters critical thinking, 
improves communication skills among participants, and 
actively engages learners. 
Crimmins, M.A., G. Zaimes, N. Haas, C.K. Jones, G. Garfin, 
and T.M. Crimmins. 2007. Changes on the range: Exploring 
climate change with range managers. J. Nat. Resour. Life Sci. 
Educ. 36:76–86. View the full article online at /www.jnrlse.
org/issues/.
Learning Exercise 
Brings Land Managers 
and Scientists Together 
to Discuss Management 
and Climate Issues
c
A
re
er
 &
 e
D
u
c
A
ti
o
N
Semiarid rangeland in southeastern Arizona.
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 27
Early Career Members
The Road Not Taken
B. Todd Campbell
Many of you may read the title of this month’s column and think about Robert 
Frost’s classic poem by the same title. 
For those of you not familiar with 
this poem, Frost eloquently describes 
the “fork in the road” that we all face 
one or more times during our personal
and professional life. I admit 
facing the dreaded fork in the road 
on many occasions in my life thus 
far, both professionally and personally,
and many of you probably have 
also.
Approximately four years ago, 
the ASA–CSSA–SSSA leadership 
approached a fork in the road when 
thinking about the future of our 
Societies. Thanks to their forward 
thinking at that time, the executive 
committee began a dialogue focused 
on the long-term future of our membership.
One issue arising out of this 
dialogue was the need to form an ad 
hoc committee to discuss the needs 
of members in the early stage of their 
careers. Our Society leaders during 
this time recognized members early 
in their careers would become the 
future leaders of our organizations. 
Prior to the Annual Meetings in 
Denver during 2003, a group of six 
Society members was asked to serve 
on an ad hoc early career member 
committee. That year, we had our 
first official committee meeting at the 
Annual Meetings in Denver. We had 
a very good dialogue and developed 
many ideas for Society programs 
focused on early career members. 
During the first year of our committee
efforts, we established a monthly 
CSA News column focused on issues 
pertinent to early career members. 
These issues included career change, 
manuscript writing, balancing home 
and work life, dual-career households,
etc.
At the following year’s Annual 
Meetings in Seattle, we implemented 
the first programs directed toward 
early career members. These programs
included grant-writing op-
portunities, manuscript writing, 
and an early career member social. 
After returning from the 2004 Annual
Meetings in Seattle, our ad hoc 
committee continued to bloom and 
yield additional fruit. During 2005, 
we continued to prepare the monthly 
CSA News column, plan similar early 
career member Annual Meeting programs,
and began steps to establish 
ourselves as a “standing” committee
of the Societies. Our committee 
worked with the executive committee
during this time to develop a 
committee appointment plan schedule
that expanded the committee to 
nine members, three representing 
each of the Societies. This plan was 
soon adopted and allowed for an 
expansion of early career programs 
and efforts. By the time the 2006 Annual
Meetings in Indianapolis came 
around, our standing committee had 
continued the CSA News columns, 
established an early career member 
award, and expanded our early 
career member programming to include
a session called “Job Opportu-
nities Outside of Academia.” 
During 2007, 
your early career 
member committee
has continued 
to develop the 
programs envisioned
by our 
Society leadership
back in 2003. 
For example, last month’s Annual 
Meetings included additional early 
career member programs focused on 
professional development, one of the 
priorities voiced by our early career 
members over the last four years. As 
we look to the future of our Societies, 
let us continue keeping leaders of the 
future in mind. Let us also continue 
opting to take the “road not taken.” 
It has been a pleasure to work with 
those involved in the early career 
member committee over the last four 
years. If you are a Society member 
early in your career, I urge you to tell 
a Society leader that you would like 
to participate on this committee and 
help secure our future as an organization.
c
A
reer &
 e
D
u
c
A
tio
N
B. Todd Campbell, Early Career Member 
Committee Chair; todd.campbell@ars.usda.
gov.
 Job Listings
2 CSA News V52 N12 December 2007 
Bachelors/Equivalent Required
Alabama—Regional Extension Agent. The Alabama Cooperative
Extension System is seeking candidates for the position of 
Regional Extension Agent (Two vacancies) to work in the Tennessee
Valley area. Agronomic Crops is the primary program 
area for these positions. For further information regarding the 
duties and responsibilities, minimum requirements, and application
process, please visit our website at www.aces.edu/hr 
Minorities and Women are encouraged to apply. The Alabama 
Cooperative Extension System is an Affirmative Action/Equal 
Opportunity Employer.
Texas—Farm Manager. Ceres, Inc, a leading developer of dedicated
energy crops, is seeking Farm Manager to help with Re-
search Farming activities in College Station, Texas. This position 
will require some travel. Responsibilities: *Oversee the daily 
activities of a Research Farm for multiple crop species across 
multiple disciplines including: scheduling activities, land preparation,
record keeping, equipment maintenance and operation, 
and supervision of part-time and full-time employees *Implement,
organize and supervise standard operating procedures 
for all chemical, pesticide, and fertilizer applications, as well as 
worker safety programs *Responsible for all aspects of operation 
and maintenance of facilities to include offices, seed plant, seed 
storage, grain driers, plant tissue driers, greenhouses, irrigation 
systems, pesticide storage, farm shop, and other facilities *Assist 
in all aspects of field trials with multiple species in accordance 
with business goals and multiple project leaders *Communicate 
activities effectively to staff and management Qualifications: 
*Bachelors or Masters Degree in Agronomy, Crop Science or Biology
*Valid commercial drivers license *Pesticide applicators 
license must be obtained within 6 months of employment Please 
apply through our website at http://ceres.net.
Texas—Agricultural Field Representative. SYNAGRO, an environmental
company specializing in biosolids recycling through-
out the United States, has immediate openings for Agricultural 
Field Representatives in Alabama, Maryland, Michigan, Kansas, 
and Northern California. The Agricultural Field Representative 
is responsible for interfacing with environmental regulatory 
agencies, farmers and the public in the process of obtaining 
permits and recycling biosolids through land application. Duties
include: preparing permit applications; coordinating field 
application schedules, verifying compliance with regulations 
and permits; and participating in local community acceptance 
programs and agricultural organizations. Qualifications: agricultural
or environmental background and/or degree; excellent 
interpersonal skills; ability to work independently and as productive
team player; and strong organizational, time manage-
ment and detail skills. EOE. Send letter of interest/resume to: 
careers@synagro.com or fax to 713-369-1758 or mail to Synagro 
1800 Bering Drive Suite 1000 Houston, TX 77057 Attn. Human 
Resources Department.
Various U.S.—Senior Agronomists: Seed Production, Research,
Customer Support. Ceres, Inc, a leading developer of 
dedicated energy crops, is seeking experienced agronomists for 
positions in NE, KS, IA and TX. Multiple positions exist in seed 
production, research, and customer support. Competitive salary
is commensurate with experience. Responsibilities include 
but not limited to: *Agronomic trial establishment and supervision
*Integrated pest management *Crop observation *Research 
implementation and assistance *Clear communication to commercial
organization, marketing personnel and scientists *Su-
pervision of permanent and seasonal staff *Travel as required. 
Requirements: *BS. in agronomy or related subject *5-10 years of 
related professional experience *Strong organizational and interpersonal
skills *Demonstrated experience with field research, 
preferably with grass species *Able to work independently and 
capable of solving complex logistical scheduling issues *Excellent
oral and written communication skills. Please apply for this 
position through the company web site at www.ceres.net.
Wisconsin—Agronomy Sales. Join the Master Seedsmen. Expect
wonders. If you hold an Agronomy degree and are a hunt-
ing, travel and outdoor enthusiast, we might have your dream 
job. Deer Creek Seed invites you to explore an exciting full-time 
opportunity in wildlife, turf, forage and native seed sales with 
respected Master Seedsmen. For more information, visit our 
Web site www.deercreekseed.com. “Though I do not believe 
that a plant will spring up where no seed has been, I have great 
faith in a seed. Convince me that you have a seed there and I am 
prepared to expect wonders.”—Henry David Thoreau.
Masters/Equivalent Required
Iowa—Regional Maize Product Development Head. Syngenta
Seeds has an exciting opportunity for a Regional Maize 
PD Head in Slater, Iowa, to coordinate and lead the activities 
of Product Development managers, scientists and support staff 
within the NAFTA market segment. Key efforts will be to develop
high performing corn products that meet the needs of the 
Syngenta brands. You will work with brand product managers 
and the global PD organization to set objectives for the breeding 
teams that provide high performing, competitive corn products. 
Position also supports trait conversion efforts; lead/support designed
breeding teams by creating a high energy environment; 
providing leadership/support to research station/trial management
groups; create/manage budgets for designated teams; and 
provide coaching/mentorship for scientists that promote individual
growth and development. Requirements include PhD in 
breeding or MS with extensive experience; thorough knowledge 
of breeding theory and corn germplasm; strong knowledge of 
c
A
re
er
 &
 e
D
u
c
A
ti
o
N
The deadline for job listings is the first of the month preceding 
publication (e.g., 1 September for the October issue). To submit a 
listing online, go to: www.careerplacement.org and click on “Post 
a Job Listing” or email copy to jobs@agronomy.org. The listing will be 
posted online within three business days. The charge for personnel 
ads is $200 for the first 700 characters and $100 per 475 characters 
thereafter. Graduate assistantships and postdoctoral positions (full listings)
are $100 for the first 700 characters and $100 per 475 characters 
thereafter; or, if abbreviated (job title, name, address, phone/fax/email), 
they are $50. Members receive one ad free (up to 1400 characters) in 
the “Positions Wanted” category per year; nonmembers are charged 
$7.50 per month.
For questions regarding job listings, email jobs@agronomy.org or 
call 608-268-4972; For display ads, email abarton@2bartons.com or call 
847-698-5069. Our online Career Placement Center provides a searchable
job and resume database—see www.careerplacement.org. Contact 
Leann Malison, 608-268-4949 or lmalison@agronomy.org.
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 2
biotechnology, marker applications to breeding, and regulatory
and compliance requirements. Successful candidates will 
also have strong knowledge of seed industry and NAFTA trait 
and hybrid markers. Must also be able to lead/manage group of 
scientists within a complex business environment, have excellent
interpersonal, communication skills, and computer skills. 
5 years of demonstrated experience as a manager/leader of a 
large research team required. Syngenta Seeds offers a competitive
compensation/benefits package. Submit resume/cover let-
ter to jobs.seedsnafta@syngenta.com and reference Job SPD07083.
EOE. 
Minnesota—Scientist: Trait Geneticist. Syngenta Seeds has an 
exciting opportunity for a Trait Geneticist in Stanton, Minnesota. 
Join our efforts in supporting the development, implementation 
and use of genetic material in maize and soybean gene discovery 
and validation projects. You will work on key genetic projects 
with project leaders, field development and other scientists; lead 
and participate in projects for selected traits, providing genetic 
material development expertise and support; ensure emerging 
strategies and materials are implemented broadly in association
studies; participate in development of tools, protocols and 
methodologies; participate on multi-disciplinary project teams 
in an effort to develop products/extract value from Native Traits 
and Molecular Marker initiatives. Qualifications include, expertise
in plant/animal breeding theory and Mendelian genetics; 
Ph.D. or MS and related experience; thorough knowledge of 
gene discovery strategies and methodologies including genomics;
strong understanding of genotyping systems; and excellent 
organizational, communication and analytical skills. Must be 
comfortable working in a cross-functional/cross-cultural matrix
team environment. Syngenta offers a competitive salary/
benefits package. Please submit resume/cover letter to Syngenta 
Seeds at jobs.seedsnafta@syngenta.com. Please reference Job No 
SPD07-092. EOE.
Missouri—Assistant Professor: Horticulture. Tenure track position
to teach undergraduate courses in horticulture and allied 
fields. Must have strong background in horticulture. The successful
candidate will participate in curriculum and laboratory 
development in the department and will provide new expertise
to lead the program in new directions. Additional respon-
sibilities include; advising students, serving on committees, 
professional development and service to area industries. Send 
application to Chair, Southeast Missouri State University, One 
University Plaza, MS 6100, Cape Girardeau, MO 63701. Detailed 
position description and application information available at 
www.semo.edu/agriculture/sejobs.htm. Screening will begin 
February 1, 2008.
Nebraska—Manager: Laboratory Technology & Development. 
Company Name: AgSource Harris Laboratories 300 Speedway 
Circle, Unit 2 Lincoln, NE 68502 AgSource Harris Laboratories
contact name: Steve Frack, Vice President, AgSource Har-
ris Laboratories 402-476-0300 sfrack@agsource.com. Qualifications:
Minimum of a Masters degree in analytical chemistry 
(soil chemistry is preferred), with laboratory experience. Position
opening date: October 17, 2007 Position description: This 
position will provide direct supervision and management of 
laboratory staff at AgSource Harris’ division; performing quality
control, technical support, project tracking, volume manage-
ment and human resource functions. In addition, this position 
will also provide analytical support for two other laboratories 
within the AgSource Cooperative Services system. Responsibilities
include but are not limited to: improving laboratory consis-
tency, reproducibility, overall data quality, new product development,
method validation and new instrumentation research. 
With AgSource’s wide range of testing services and geographic 
distribution, this position will provide assistance in developing 
and maintaining nationwide university relations.
Saskatchewan—Lecturer: Soil Science. University of Saskatchewan
A full-time Lecturer position has been created to support 
a new undergraduate program in Renewable Resource Management
(RRM) in the College of Agriculture and Bioresources; it is 
a faculty position with no research responsibilities. Reporting 
to the Head of the Dept. of Soil Science, the successful applicant
will develop and deliver lecture-based and field courses. A 
strong background in taxonomy (plant and soil classification) is 
desirable. Working with faculty, the candidate will be responsible
for all aspects of coordinating and facilitating off-campus 
field courses and student activities. Professional relationships 
must be established with faculty, staff, students, and key stakeholders
including government, industry, and Indigenous com-
munities. Some off-campus work is required, including annual 
delivery of a field camp. The candidate must possess a M.Sc. or 
Ph.D. in an appropriate discipline (e.g. Plant Ecology, Soil Science
or Forestry). Previous post-secondary teaching experience 
is required. Applications, including a CV, academic transcripts, 
statement of teaching experience and three references can be 
submitted to Dr. Fran Walley, Head, Dept. of Soil Science, Univ. 
of Saskatchewan, 51 Campus Drive, Saskatoon, SK, Canada S7N 
5A8. Tel: 306-966-6854. E-mail: fran.walley@usask.ca. Applications
should be received by January 30, 2008. The position is ef-
fective July 1, 2008. All qualified individuals are invited to apply, 
but Canadian citizens and permanent residents will be given 
c
A
reer &
 e
D
u
c
A
tio
N
Applicants Invited
The Center for Plant Breeding 
and Applied Plant Genomics
North Carolina State University
PIONEER HI-BRED 
UNIVERSITY PLANT BREEDING FELLOWSHIPS
Fully funded fellowships at N.C. State University in one of the largest 
plant breeding programs in the U.S. The program is interdisciplinary 
and offers a full range of courses and research programs in field, forestry
and horticultural crops. N.C. State graduates are well-prepared 
for careers as leaders and professionals in the plant breeding industry. 
Pioneer Hi-Bred Fellowship benefits include:
Masters or doctoral graduate fellowships in plant breeding
Fully funded: student stipend, tuition and fees, health benefits
Mentoring opportunities with Pioneer Hi-Bred professionals
Potential internship and co-op opportunities at Pioneer Hi-Bred 
Applicants for admission to the Crop Science Department, contact: Dr. 
Randy Wells, E-mail: randy_wells@ncsu.edu. Applicants for admission
to the Horticultural Science Department, contact: Dr. John Dole, 
E-mail: john_dole@ncsu.edu. Applicants interested in a Pioneer HiBred
Fellowship (or needing more information) should request that 
applications be forwarded to: Dr. Charles W. Stuber, Director, Center 
for Plant Breeding and Applied Plant Genomics, E-mail: cstuber@
ncsu.edu.
Closing date for applications is January 31, 2008
•
•
•
•
 0 CSA News V52 N12 December 2007 
priority. More information about the University, College, and 
Department can be found at www.agbio.usask.ca.
Doctorate/Equivalent Required
Arkansas—Department Head and Professor. Department of 
Crop, Soil & Environmental Sciences, University of Arkansas, 
Fayetteville, Arkansas. The University of Arkansas seeks an energetic
individual to provide administrative leadership for the 
extension, instruction, and research functions of the Department
of Crop, Soil, and Environmental Sciences (CSES). The 
CSES Head facilitates statewide agronomic and environmental 
science research and extension programs. The CSES Department
currently has 40 faculty members. The Department offers 
B.S. degrees in Crop Management and Environmental, Soil, and 
Water Science with a current enrollment of 90 undergraduate 
students. M.S. and Ph.D. degrees are also offered with a current 
enrollment of 60 graduate students. The Head will also serve as 
part of the broader administrative team of the Division of Agriculture
and the Dale Bumpers College of Agricultural, Food and 
Life Sciences. Requires a doctorate in crop, environmental, soil, 
water, or weed science or a closely related discipline. The candidate
must possess a record of outstanding professional achieve-
ment that will qualify for tenure at the rank of full professor, and 
possess the administrative abilities to direct an academic department
engaged in extension, instruction, and research activi-
ties. Salary commensurate with qualifications and experience; 
tenure is negotiable. Further details are listed at: http://hr.uark.
edu/Employment/listingsjob.asp?ListingID=4935. Review of 
applications will commence on January 7, 2008, and continue 
until a suitable candidate is selected. Nominations of possible 
candidates are solicited. Applicants should submit a complete, 
hard-copy-only application consisting of: (a) a letter of application
including a statement of professional goals and philosophy 
of administrative leadership for extension, instruction, and research,
(b) professional vitae, and (c) name of five references 
with complete address, phone number, and e-mail. Applications 
should be mailed to: Dr. Sung M. Lim, CSES Search Committee 
Chair, c/o Pat D. Nelson, Department of Plant Pathology, PTSC217,
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701, Phone: 479-
575-2445, Email: smlim@uark.edu. The University of Arkansas 
is an equal opportunity, affirmative action institution. All applicants
are subject to public disclosure under the Arkansas Free-
dom of Information Act and persons hired must have proof of 
legal authority to work in the United States.
California—Alfalfa Breeder. Cal West Seeds is seeking a plant 
breeder in Woodland, CA. This highly motivated individual 
will have the ability to work as a member of a multidisciplinary 
variety development team. Primary responsibility is the development
of improved alfalfa varieties utilizing both classical and 
the latest in breeding technologies. Goals of breeding program 
include the development of superior alfalfa varieties for semi- 
and non-dormant global markets, with focus on agronomic 
traits such as yield, seed production, forage quality, disease, insect,
and nematode resistance, as appropriate. Individual will 
conduct and design research program that encompasses field, 
greenhouse, and laboratory components directed at commercial 
variety development; select and use appropriate statistical tools 
to design trials, analyze data, and report findings; write reports 
summarizing research methods, results, conclusions, and recommendations
with presentations to senior management, sales 
and marketing staff, and/or customers; assist in formulating the 
annual budget for the research facility; and care and maintenance
of company assets. Individual will contribute to the ge-
netic engineering of crop plants, providing input on trait targets,
construct design and commercial gene stacking strategy; 
evaluate transformants; design/implement phenotypic screens 
appropriate for evaluation of specific traits, conduct event selection
for new commercial traits, coordinate regulated field tri-
als, develop transgenic populations including proper controls, 
collect data to support regulatory submission, integrate trait(s) 
into elite breeding lines. Individual will also interact with the 
production and field services department of the organization. 
Domestic and International travel required. Experience: PhD 
in Plant Breeding and Genetics, MS in Plant Breeding and Genetics
or related field with 3-5 years plant breeding experience. 
Individual should have a strong background in plant breeding, 
genetics, field plot technique and statistical analysis. Knowledge 
of molecular biology and experience with molecular marker applications
is highly desirable. PC proficiency, proven leadership, 
and organizational skills a must. Experience in alfalfa breeding
is preferred. Bilingual/Spanish helpful. Cal/West Seeds, an 
equal opportunity employer, offers an excellent salary, incentive 
plan and benefit package. Send resume, cover letter and transcripts
to: Cal/West Seeds Attn: Human Resources P.O. Box 
1428 Woodland, CA 95776 E-mail address: a.stranahan@calwest 
seeds.com Fax: 530-666-1407. All inquiries are confidential.
Georgia—Assistant Professor: Turfgrass Weed Science. Description:
The Department of Crop and Soil Sciences, University 
of Georgia, Griffin Campus invites applications for a 12-month 
tenure track position (60% Extension, 30% Research, and 10% 
Teaching) in Weed Science. The successful candidate is expected 
to develop extension, research, and instructional programs that 
focus on weed management in turfgrass. Areas of investigation 
may include, but are not limited to, cultural management; herc
A
re
er
 &
 e
D
u
c
A
ti
o
N
Applicants Invited
The Center for Plant Breeding 
and Applied Plant Genomics
North Carolina State University
MONSANTO FELLOWS IN PLANT BREEDING
Fully funded fellowships at N.C. State University in one of the largest 
plant breeding programs in the U.S. The program is interdisciplinary 
and offers a full range of courses and research programs in field, forestry
and horticultural crops. N.C. State graduates are well-prepared 
for careers as leaders and professionals in the plant breeding industry. 
Monsanto Fellows’ benefits include:
Doctoral graduate fellowships in plant breeding
Fully funded: student stipend, tuition and fees, health benefits
 Monsanto Outstanding Students in Plant Breeding, a multi-university
professional development and business management cur-
riculum designed for plant breeders
Mentoring opportunities with Monsanto professionals
Potential internship, co-op opportunities at Monsanto 
Applicants for admission to the Crop Science Department, contact: Dr. 
Randy Wells, E-mail: randy_wells@ncsu.edu. Applicants for admission
to the Horticultural Science Department, contact: Dr. John Dole, 
E-mail: john_dole@ncsu.edu. Applicants interested in a Monsanto Fellowship
(or needing more information) should request that applica-
tions be forwarded to: Dr. Charles W. Stuber, Director, Center for Plant 
Breeding and Applied Plant Genomics, E-mail: cstuber@ncsu.edu.
Closing date for applications is January 31, 2008
•
•
•
•
•
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 1
bicide physiology and resistance; environmental fate; and weed 
ecology. The candidate must work cooperatively with UGA 
faculty, the interdisciplinary Turfgrass Team, county extension 
personnel, industry, and commodity groups. Instructional responsibilities
will include participation in graduate student edu-
cation and involvement in the undergraduate teaching program 
on the UGA Athens and Griffin Campuses. Salary: Commensurate
with qualifications and experience. Basic Qualifications: 
Ph.D. in Weed Science, Agronomy, Crop Science or a closely 
related field. The candidates should have strong credentials in 
Weed Science that relate to the job responsibilities. Experience 
in turfgrass is desirable but not essential. The incumbent should 
have a demonstrated ability to work collaboratively, secure extramural
funding and publish research findings and outreach 
education materials. Teaching experience is also desirable. Application:
Application packages and letters of recommendation 
can be electronically sent to: Dr. Clint Waltz Department of Crop 
and Soil Sciences The University of Georgia-Griffin Campus 
1109 Experiment Street Griffin, GA 30223 E-mail: cwaltz@uga.
edu Phone: 770-228-7300 Applicants must submit the following 
documentation: a letter of application, curriculum vita, official 
transcripts, four letters of reference, and any other information 
that reflects on professional qualifications. To assure full consideration,
applications must be received by December 7, 2007. 
The University of Georgia is an Affirmative Action/ Equal Opportunity
Employer.
Georgia—Warm-Season Grass Breeding. The Department of 
Crop and Soil Sciences, University of Georgia, Tifton Campus, 
Tifton, GA, invites applications for a 12-month tenure-track 95% 
research and 5% teaching position for an Assistant Professor. 
The successful candidate will combine traditional and genomic 
technology to develop improved cultivars and germplasms of 
warm-season grasses, mainly turfgrasses adapted to the Southeastern
U.S. The successful candidate is expected to secure 
extramural funding to support the research program, release 
improved cultivars and germplasms, and publish results from 
the program in peer reviewed journals. The candidate will be 
expected to establish and maintain excellent relations with clientele
and industry at the state, regional, and national levels in 
grass breeding and management. The candidate will be expected
to conduct basic and applied research and effectively com-
municate results; to participate in committee service, provide 
academic leadership at the statewide level, engage in professional
societies related to the grass breeding/genetics/management 
area, direct graduate student research projects and serve on 
graduate student advisory committees. Qualifications include a 
Ph.D. degree in plant breeding, plant genetics, or closely related 
disciplines, and a demonstrated ability to work collaboratively, 
obtain extramural funding and publish results. Training or experience
in grass breeding (especially turfgrasses) and ability to 
work with molecular geneticists is desirable. Applicants should 
submit electronically a letter of application, curriculum vitae including
a list of publications and contact details of four profes-
sional references, as well as original college transcripts to Dr. 
Jerry Johnson, Search Committee Chair, Crop & Soil Sciences, 
University of Georgia, Griffin Campus, 1109 Experiment Street, 
Griffin, GA 30223, e-mail: jjohnson@griffin.uga.edu. To assure 
full consideration, applications must be received by February 15, 
2008. Review of applications will continue until a suitable candidate
is selected. The University of Georgia is an Affirmative 
Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.
Idaho—Assistant/Associate Professor: Potato Post-Harvest 
Physiology. The University of Idaho’s Plant, Soil and Entomological
Sciences Department seeks a tenure track assistant/as-
sociate professor in potato post-harvest physiology at the Kimberly
R&E Center in Kimberly, ID. Salary is commensurate with 
qualifications/experience. Responsibilities: Conduct an innovative,
industry responsive research (85%) and advising/outreach 
(15%) program on potato post-harvest physiology and nutritional
quality. Manage a modern storage testing facility. The 
collaborative program includes basic/applied elements addressing
post-harvest physiology, dormancy, sprouting, tuber qual-
ity/nutrition, and cultivar development. External funding, professional
activity, supervising graduate students, and refereed 
publications are expected. Required: Earned doctorate by July 
1, 2008, in plant physiology, biochemistry, horticulture, or plant 
science discipline; training in vegetable/fruit post-harvest physiology;
scholarly contributions. Desired: Experience with potato 
storage physiology; effective collaborative research; ability to 
obtain external funding; excellent interpersonal and communication
skills; experience advising graduate students, and partic-
ipation in professional activities. Benefits: Salary commensurate 
with background/experience. Benefits available; the University 
of Idaho provides health insurance and a retirement plan with 
a choice of contributing to TIAA-CREF or VALIC. Application 
Materials: Individuals MUST complete the online application 
(www.hr.uidaho.edu) including an application letter addressing 
required/desired qualifications, CV, academic transcripts, three 
reference letters and contact information for references. Documents
which cannot be submitted online, i.e., transcripts/refer-
ence letters, should be sent to: Dr. Michael Thornton, SW Idaho 
R&E Center, 29603 U of I Lane, Parma, ID 83660. Phone: 208722-6701.
Fax: 208-722-6708. Email: miket@uidaho.edu. Closing 
date: January 4, 2008, or until suitable candidate is identified. To 
enrich education through diversity the University of Idaho is an 
c
A
reer &
 e
D
u
c
A
tio
N
Application Scientist—Bioinformatics 
Support (6156BR) Johnston, IA
Pioneer Hi-Bred is seeking an Application Scientist to provide high-level 
scientific consultation, data analysis capabilities, and Bioinformatics application
support to its internal research organization. Position has an empha-
sis on Bioinformatics as it relates to gene expression technologies and data 
analysis. Incumbent expected to possess and maintain a thorough understanding
of state-of-the-art computational approaches for gene expression 
data management and analysis in order to provide strategic leadership in 
this area. Candidate will collaborate with scientists, seeking to understand 
their current and potential Bioinformatics needs, identifying opportunities
to apply existing capabilities, evaluating and recommending suitable 
third-party solutions, and defining requirements for internally developed 
resources to meet these needs. Will also contribute to various projects by 
both enhancing researcher self-sufficiency and by carrying out gene expression
analyses for researchers. Responsible for the design, development, and 
deployment of Bioinformatics applications and client support processes. 
Contribute to the ongoing support of various Bioinformatics tools and datasets,
including testing, training, documentation, and ensuring resolution of 
users questions regarding these capabilities. 
A Ph.D. in Bioinformatics, Genetics, Biochemistry or a related field with 2 or 
more years of post-degree experience is required, or equivalent amount of 
relevant education and experience. Industrial research experience in crop 
or plant biotechnology is highly desirable. Demonstrable experience working
with high-throughput data sets generated by gene expression platforms 
such as Agilent, and using data management and analysis tools such as 
GeneSpring or Rosetta Resolver, is essential. Demonstrated proficiency in 
both Windows and UNIX environments as well as with data analysis tools 
such as Perl, Excel, and Spotfire are also required. 
Job Req for this position is 6156BR. To apply, visit http://www.pioneer.com/careers. EOE.
 2 CSA News V52 N12 December 2007 
equal opportunity/affirmative action employer and educational 
institution.
Illinois—Plant Systems Modeling. We seek an outstanding 
early career scientist with a background in mathematical modeling
of plant biological systems for a full-time, tenure-track 
faculty position at the assistant professor level in the Department
of Plant Biology. Exceptional candidates at the associate or 
full professor level may be considered. Candidates must have a 
Ph.D. in plant sciences or related field and experience in mathematical
modeling of biological systems. The ideal candidate 
would be a plant scientist with background in design of mechanistic
models for forecasting plant productivity and research in-
terest in plants as biofuel feedstocks. The successful candidate 
would be expected to be an integral part of the Energy Biosciences
Institute and would receive funding to develop ~50% of 
their research effort within the Institute’s mission with a focus 
on the development of new models and approaches to forecast 
productivity of lignocellulosic feedstocks globally. The candidate
must also develop an externally funded research program 
to model plant systems, which could range from the molecular 
to the ecosystem level. The successful candidate would become 
part of a dynamic and well-established biology and agriculture 
faculty, as well as a broadly based genomics community. The 
position involves both graduate and undergraduate instruction 
including participation in the development of new bioenergy 
curriculum. The proposed starting date is August 16, 2008. Salary
is commensurate with qualification. Minorities, women, and 
other designated groups are encouraged to apply. To ensure full 
consideration, applicants should submit a CV, a statement of 
research and teaching interests, and the names and contact information
of three references no later than January 11, 2008. Ap-
plicants may be interviewed before the closing date; however, 
no hiring decision will be made until after that date. Please send 
application materials, including email address, to the Plant Systems
Modeling Search Committee, School of Integrative Biology, 
University of Illinois, 286 Morrill Hall, 505 South Goodwin Ave., 
Urbana, IL 61801 (phone: 217-333-3044; fax: 217-244-1224; email: 
sib@life.uiuc.edu). The University of Illinois is an Affirmative 
Action, Equal Opportunity Employer.
Kansas—Assistant Professor: Soil Fertility and Nutrient Management.
This individual will plan, deliver, and evaluate exten-
sion education programs and conduct applied research with 
emphasis on soil fertility and nutrient management in cropping 
systems and preserving/improving the quality of Kansas soil 
and water resources. Interact as a member of a multi-disciplinary
team developing appropriate, environmentally sound nutri-
ent management programs utilizing fertilizer, animal waste, 
crop residues, and other organic by-products. Coordinate extension
educational programs on soil fertility, nutrient manage-
ment, and waste management with extension specialists, county 
agents, farm and commodity organizations, agricultural industry,
and state and federal agencies. Provide leadership in devel-
oping educational offerings to meet continuing education needs 
of extension agents, Certified Crop Advisors, and industry and 
agency employees. Develop a complementary applied research 
program, train graduate students, and publish results in refereed
journals. Secure grant funding to support extension/re-
search projects in soil fertility/nutrient management. Travel as 
necessary to carry out extension and research responsibilities. 
Requirements are a Ph.D. in agronomy, soil science, or closely 
related area, with a strong background in soil fertility; field research
experience with soil fertility and nutrient management; 
and a thorough knowledge of cropping systems. Excellent oral 
and written communication skills in English are required as 
well as the ability to communicate with a wide range of audiences
using various media. The individual should have strong 
leadership skills and a willingness to work as a part of an interdisciplinary
team with people from various backgrounds, and 
a strong commitment to fostering diversity in the department. 
The position is an Assistant professor, 12 month, tenure-track 
position, 80% Extension and 20% Research. The location is Department
of Agronomy, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 
66506-5501 complete position description is available at: www.
agronomy.k-state.edu/DesktopDefault.aspx?tabid=633. To apply,
send a letter of application, resume, transcripts, and have 
three letters of reference sent to Roberto Ramos, Administrative 
Specialist, Department of Agronomy, 2004 Throckmorton Hall, 
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506. Telephone: 785532-0184.
Email: rramos@ksu.edu. Screening of applications be-
gins January 15, 2008.
Louisiana—Assistant/Associate Professor/Specialist: Weed 
Science. Full-time tenure-track position with a 75% Research 
(soybean, cotton, corn, and grain sorghum weed control) and 
25% Extension (state-wide row crop weed control specialist) 
appointment in the Louisiana State University Agricultural 
Center, located at the Dean Lee Research and Extension Center
in Alexandria.  Research: Focus primarily on evaluation of 
experimental and newly developed herbicides, weed management
systems, reduced rates, and weed management programs 
utilizing genetically transformed varieties while monitoring for 
weed shifts and herbicide resistance.  Publish results in refereed
journals and other scientific outlets.  Extension: Collaborate 
with the Extension Weed Specialist located in Winnsboro, LA 
for state-wide extension education programs using Best Management
Practices. Conduct statewide crop verification and 
demonstration trials.  A PhD in weed science agronomy or other 
agricultural-related field of study is required. Experience and 
training in extension and/or research programs are highly desirable.
Salary will be commensurate with qualifications and 
experience.  Attractive benefits package.  The position is available
upon completion of the selection process.  The application 
deadline is December 10, 2007 or until a suitable candidate is 
found.  Submit a letter of application, a resume’ with a statement 
of professional interests and goals, original university transcripts,
and three letters of reference to Dr. John Barnett, Dean 
Lee Research and Extension Center, 8105 Tom Bowman Drive, 
Alexandria, LA  71302.  Phone:  318.427.4424 Fax:  318.473.6503. 
Email:  jbarnett@agenter.lsu.edu.
Maryland—Assistant/Associate Professors: Two Tenure/Tenure
Track Positions. The University of Maryland, Department of 
Plant Science and Landscape Architecture seeks candidates for 
Two (2) tenure-track faculty positions at the Assistant or Associate
Professor level. One position is a 12-month tenure-track ap-
pointment with duties split 58% research and 42% teaching and 
offers a unique opportunity to build upon a developing Plant 
Protection Center Initiative involving the College, USDA-APHIS 
and MDA in the training of future plant protection professionals.
The second position is a 9-month tenure-track appointment 
with duties split 85% research and 15% teaching in the area of 
plant genetics, functional genomics and/or molecular physiology.
College Park is the flagship campus of the University System 
of Maryland with over 2,800 faculty and 25,000 undergraduate 
and 10,000 graduate students. Each position offers opportunities 
to interact with University of Maryland faculty affiliated with 
the College of Agriculture and Natural Resources, the College 
of Chemical & Life Sciences, and the University of Maryland 
c
A
re
er
 &
 e
D
u
c
A
ti
o
N
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 
Biotechnology Institute, as well as scientists at USDA, FDA, 
EPA, and NIH. PhD degree in a closely related discipline is required.
A detailed position description for each position can be 
found at http://www.agnr.umd.edu/jobs/agnrjobs/home.html. 
Salary will be commensurate with experience. The University 
of Maryland offers an extensive benefits package. Candidates 
should submit: a letter of application; a complete signed CV; 
transcripts (copy acceptable for application process) and the 
names, addresses, telephone numbers, and email addresses of 3 
professional references to Susan Klotz, Department of Plant Science
and Landscape Architecture, 2102 Plant Science Building, 
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 (email: sklotz@
umd.edu). Applicants at the Associate Professor level should 
include copies of three representative publications. Review of 
application materials will continue until the position is filled. 
EEO/AA.
Maryland—Assistant/Associate Professor: Carbon Ecology & 
Accounting. Tenure-track faculty, 9 month appointment, 60% 
teaching and 40% research. The candidate is expected to develop
a nationally and internationally recognized research pro-
gram in carbon ecology and accounting that compliments the 
department’s efforts to use natural ecosystems as robust models
for achieving environmental and economic sustainability. 
The individual in this position will be expected to collaborate 
with existing faculty members working in: a.) ecological engineering,
b.) systems ecology, c.) energy systems modeling, d.) 
wetland ecology and engineering, e.) bioremediation. f.) waste 
management, g.) agroecology. The candidate will be expected 
to develop and teach at least two undergraduate courses and 
graduate courses of their choosing in related areas. The individual
must secure extramural funds for research. The candi-
date must have an earned Ph.D. degree in environmental science,
related engineering discipline, systems ecology, ecological 
design, or other closely related discipline. The successful candidate
must be able to apply quantitative and systems-based ap-
proaches to the study of human-environment interactions and 
have professional experience in ecology. Possession of at least 
one engineering degree is preferred. Submit by regular mail a 
cover letter, statement of teaching and research interests, detailed
signed curriculum vitae, copies of no more than two pub-
lications or manuscripts, transcripts, and the names and contact 
information for four professional references to: Dr. David Tilley, 
Search Committee Chair, Department of Environmental Science 
& Technology, 1421 Bldg. No. 142, College Park, MD 20742. To 
ensure full consideration applications should be received by December
12, 2007. Minorities and women are encouraged to apply. 
The University of Maryland is an equal opportunity affirmative 
action employer.
New Mexico—Assistant Professor: Extension Agronomy Specialist.
The department of Extension Plant Sciences, New Mex-
ico State University is seeking applicants for a 12-month, tenure-track,
75% extension and 25% research position in dryland 
and irrigated agricultural systems. The position is located in Las 
Cruces, NM with statewide responsibilities. To qualify for this 
position, applicants must have a Ph.D. (in hand by hire date) in 
Agronomy, Soil Science or closely related field, with emphasis on 
sustainable agronomic production of crops grown in semi-arid 
and arid regions. The incumbent will be expected to develop an 
aggressive extension program and an interdisciplinary research 
program associated with the major crops grown in New Mexico. 
These include, but are not limited to, alfalfa, cotton and peanuts.
Other qualifications include: experience in irrigated crop 
production, high pH soils, plant nutrition, crop rotations, pest 
management and integrated farming techniques; experience in 
extension work and programming; ability to interpret and make 
practical application of current agronomic research findings 
with county extension agents, agricultural producers, agribusiness,
homeowners and the general public; ability to effectively 
interact, communicate (oral and written) and relate to people of 
all ages, incomes, education levels and ethnic backgrounds. This 
position is responsible for a strong, multi-disciplinary extension 
program that complements current and future programs of other
specialists and county agents throughout the state. The suc-
cessful candidate will work closely with NMSU forage specialists
to conduct alfalfa programs and assist with dissemination 
of research results from projects throughout the state, and will 
help maintain relationships with alfalfa and other commodity 
groups. Salary is commensurate with education and experience. 
Review of applications will begin on December 15, 2007 and 
will continue until a suitable applicant is found. Submit letter 
of interest, resume or vitae, brief (500 words or less) summary 
of extension and research goals, unofficial transcripts, and three 
letters of reference to: Dr. Mark Marsalis, Search Committee 
Chairman, Extension Plant Sciences Dept., NMSU, Box 30003, 
MSC 3AE, Las Cruces, NM 88003. Electronic applications will 
not be accepted. For more information about the position contact 
Mark Marsalis at: 505-985-2292 or Email: marsalis@nmsu.edu. 
New Mexico State University is an EEO/AA Employer.
New Mexico—Assistant Professor: Extension Urban/Small 
Farms IPM Specialist. The department of Extension Plant Sciences,
New Mexico State University is seeking applicants for a 
12-month, tenure track, 75% extension, 25% research position. 
Position located in Los Lunas, NM with statewide responsibilities.
Ph.D. (in hand by hire date) in Entomology, Plant Pathology, 
Weed Science or closely related field with emphasis on and/or 
experience in integrated pest management. Must be knowledgeable
in integrated pest management, including conventional 
and organic methods of control, Knowledge of and experience 
with a wide range of small farms cropping systems and with 
urban landscapes is desirable. Responsible for a progressive 
Extension educational program in integrated pest management 
in production systems including agricultural commodities, turf 
and landscape areas. Salary commensurate with education and 
experience. Valid driver’s license and personal auto required; reimbursed
at 48.5 cents per mile. Electronic applications will not 
be accepted. Offer of employment contingent upon verification 
of individual’s eligibility for employment in the U.S. For complete
job description visit: http://www.nmsu.edu/~personel/
postings NMSU 2007010642. Reply to: Dr. Natalie Goldberg, Extension
Plant Sciences Dept., NMSU. Box 30003, MSC 3AE, Las 
Cruces, NM 88003. Telephone: 505-646-1621, E-mail: ngoldber@
nmsu.edu. Review of letter of interest, resume, brief (500 word 
max.) summary of Extension and research goals, unofficial transcripts
and three confidential reference letters will begin: De-
cember 15, 2007 and continue until position is filled. NMSU is 
an EEO/AA employer.
New York—Assistant Professor: Environmental Science. 
Queens College invites applications for two tenure-track positions
in the School of Earth and Environmental Sciences to start 
Fall 2008. A PhD related to environmental mineralogy, ecotoxicology,
geomicrobiology, or paleobiology and achievements in 
teaching and research are required. Details of requirements, responsibilities,
and salary can be found at http://qcpages.qc.edu/
EES. Send separate teaching and research statements, CV, and 
copies of graduate transcripts, and have three current letters of 
recommendation sent to:  hemming@qc.edu by 01/15/07 (pdf 
c
A
reer &
 e
D
u
c
A
tio
N
  CSA News V52 N12 December 2007 
format preferred). Queens College is an equal opportunity, affirmative
action employer.
North Dakota—Sports Turfgrass Management Position. This 
is a tenure track 80% teaching, 20% research position at the assistant
professor rank, in the Department of Plant Sciences at North 
Dakota State University. Responsibilities will include teaching 
and advising students in the Sports and Urban Turfgrass Management
Program, greenhouse and field research, collaborating 
with other members in the department, and other disciplines 
as necessary. Teaching responsibilities will include developing 
and teaching new courses in Integrated Pest Management in 
Turfgrass, Advanced Topics in Turf Science, and Functional and 
Ornamental Grasses. Support of and participation in department
seminars and other courses when requested is expected. 
Research will focus on management of turfgrass related areas, 
responding to the needs of the regional golf courses and athletic
field managers. This will include, but not be limited to, pest 
management and maximizing turfgrass health. Required qualifications
include a PhD in turfgrass, classroom and teaching 
experience at the university level. Academic experience in turfgrass
pathology, entomology, fertility, weed control, physiology, 
and experience in field plot and laboratory techniques. Effective 
English oral and written communication skill, demonstrated 
interpersonal skills and success in conducting, analyzing and 
publishing research results, and a demonstrated ability to work 
effectively with clientele groups, colleagues, and scientists. Preferred
qualifications include experience and success in grant 
writing. Application review begins January 7, 2008, or thereafter 
until position is filled. For full consideration, candidates interested
in applying must submit the following materials to the ad-
dress below: 1) a letter of application discussing how the stated 
qualifications are met, 2) a detailed resume, 3) official academic 
transcripts from all institutions attended, and 4) arrange to have 
three current letters of reference sent to: Dr. Harlene HattermanValenti,
Chair of Search Committee, Department of Plant Sci-
ences, North Dakota State University, Box 5051, Fargo, ND 58105, 
Phone: 701-231-8536; FAX 701-231-8474, Email: H.Hatterman. 
valenti@ndsu.edu NDSU is an equal opportunity institution.
Oklahoma—Assistant Professor: Turfgrass Science. 11-month 
appointment with 30% extension and 70% research responsibilities
in the Horticulture and Landscape Architecture Depart-
ment at Oklahoma State University. Participation as a member 
of a multidisciplinary interdepartmental teaching, research and 
extension turfgrass team is expected. Qualifications: A Ph.D. in 
Horticulture, Plant Science, Crop Science or related field with 
an emphasis in and evidence of scholarly works required. Excellent
communication, computer, and interpersonal skills are 
needed. The individual will be expected to work with the turfgrass
industry. Please visit www.hortla.okstate.edu and click 
on employment for complete details. Review of applicants will 
begin on January 15, 2008 and continue until a suitable candidate
is found. OSU is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity 
Employer.
Tennessee—Professor and Head: Biosystems Engineering & 
Soil Science. Department of Biosystems Engineering and Soil 
Science (BESS), University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee. 
The Department Head provides leadership for nationally and 
internationally recognized programs in teaching, research, Extension,
and service. The BESS Department includes 26 faculty 
and 25 professional and support staff. The Department offers 
undergraduate degrees in Biosystems Engineering, and Environmental
and Soil Sciences, and graduate programs in Biosys-
tems Engineering, Biosystems Engineering Technology, and Environmental
and Soil Sciences. The Department works closely 
with the College of Engineering in its engineering-related teaching
pursuits. Additional information is available at http://bio-
engr.ag.utk.edu/. The successful candidate must qualify for 
the rank of professor in the BESS Department, with an earned 
doctoral degree in biosystems/agricultural engineering, or soil 
science, or other closely related field. In addition, the candidate 
must provide evidence of: exceptional academic achievements 
including extramural funding, as well as the demonstration of 
effective leadership, interpersonal, and communication skills; 
experience with teaching, research, and/or Extension programs 
at a land grant university, and an understanding of and commitment
to excellence for all three functions; experience in as-
sessing priorities and adapting to a changing environment with 
creativity and innovation; commitment to maintaining and expanding
diversity in the Department and the University, and 
knowledge of equal employment opportunity and affirmative 
action; and experience working in a multidisciplinary environment.
Salary and benefits commensurate with experience and 
education. Please apply online at: http://www.utextension.utk.
edu/employment/NewForms.html and attach the following 
electronic documents to the application: curriculum vita; letter 
of interest detailing leadership philosophy and illustrating commitment
to research, teaching, and Extension; names, addresses, 
and telephone numbers of four professional references; and official
transcripts showing degree(s) conferred. Applicants may 
also mail hard copies of the attachments to: Dr. Keith L. Belli, 
BESS Search Committee Chair, University of Tennessee Institute
of Agriculture, 274 Ellington Plant Sci. Bldg., Knoxville, TN 
37996-4563. Review of applications will commence on January 
30, 2008, and continue until a suitable candidate is selected. The 
University of Tennessee is an EEO/AA/Title VI/Title IX/Section 
504/ADA/ADEA institution in the provision of its education and 
employment programs and services. All qualified applicants 
will receive equal consideration for employment without regard 
to race, color, national origin, religion, sex, pregnancy, marital 
status, sexual orientation, age, physical or mental disability, or 
covered veteran status.
Texas—Assistant/Associate Professor: Soil & Environmental 
Microbiology. Texas Tech University’s Department of Plant and 
Soil Science seek applications for an Assistant/Associate Professor
of Soil and Environmental Microbiology. This is a nine-
month, tenure-eligible position, with the possibility of summer 
salary support through teaching and/or research. Responsibilities
will include (a) developing/teaching courses in soil science, 
including soil/environmental microbiology, (b) developing a 
successful research program supported by sponsored grants 
and resulting in a record of scholarly activity, (c) service to the 
department, college, and university, and (d) outreach to the 
larger community. The successful applicant will be expected to 
develop a successful interdisciplinary teaching/research program
focused on critical topics related to soil/environmental 
microbiology. Example research topics include, but are not limited
to, soil C sequestration, environmental and soil microbial 
diversity, bioremediation, waste management and concomitant 
effects on environmental quality, transport and fate of bacteria 
and biological contaminants in the environment, gene transfer 
in soils, and interaction between soil/crop management practices
and soil microbiology. The Department of Plant and Soil 
Science has a total of 30 faculty, including several faculty with 
joint appointments with other campus departments, the Texas 
Agricultural Experiment Station, and Texas Cooperative Extenc
A
re
er
 &
 e
D
u
c
A
ti
o
N
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 5
sion. Applicants must have a Ph.D. in soil science, agronomy, 
microbiology, environmental science, or a closely related field. 
Detailed knowledge of soil science is required. Ability to communicate
effectively in English; proven ability to conduct and 
publish high quality interdisciplinary scientific research; and 
citizenship or permanent resident status sufficient to allow acceptance
of a full-time position in the U.S are required. Salary 
will be commensurate with experience. Applicants should submit
a letter of application, statement of career goals, and curricu-
lum vita online at http://jobs.texastech.edu. Requisition number 
for this position is 2009TLF042. University transcripts and five 
letters of recommendation should be mailed or sent to: Dr. Richard
Zartman, Department of Plant and Soil Science, Texas Tech 
University, Lubbock, TX 79409-2122; Phone 806-742-1626; FAX 
806-742-0775; Email: richard.zartman@ttu.edu. Application and 
all application materials must be received by 1 February, 2008 or 
until a suitable candidate can be identified. The starting date is 
negotiable for summer or fall 2008. Texas Tech University is an 
Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer, committed 
to excellence through diversity. Texas Tech welcomes applications
from minorities, women, veterans, and persons with dis-
abilities.
Texas—Assistant Professor. The Agricultural Research and 
Extension Center at Beaumont, Texas. The Texas Agricultural 
Experiment Station, Texas A&M University System, seeks qualified
applicants for an Integrated Cropping System Nutrient 
Management position. Applicants should possess a Ph.D. in 
Plant Nutrition, Soil Science, Plant Physiology, or a closely related
biological science. Preference will be given to candidates 
with a strong background in physicochemical aspects of plant 
nutrient uptake, soil/water/plant nutrient modeling, and nutrient
fate analysis. Significant aspects of the research are expected 
to focus on nutrient transport, as affected by edaphic, climatic, 
biotic and physiological variables that impact the plant/soil 
continuum and the response of rice and other crops to nutrient 
availability. The incumbent will contribute to development of 
quantitative/physicochemical models and management decision
aids, and provide expertise in the plant-soil-environment 
interface as part of a team of scientists whose focus is the study 
of plant response to abiotic and biotic stresses, and physiology 
of yield and quality with an emphasis on rice. See the complete 
position description and application requirements, and apply 
on-line at https://greatjobs.tamu.edu Refer to NOV 02973. For 
additional information contact Dr. Lee Tarpley at ltarpley@
tamu.edu or 409-752-2741 x2235. Applications should be received 
by November 30, 2007. The Texas Agricultural Experiment Station
is an equal opportunity/affirmative action employer and is 
committed to excellence through diversity.
West Virginia—Assistant Professor: Agronomy. West Virginia
University, Division of Plant and Soil Sciences is seeking 
to fill a 9-month tenure track faculty position. Responsibilities 
include development of a research program in year-round pasture
systems and teaching courses in forage agronomy. A Ph.D. 
in agronomy or allied field with documented skills/aptitude to 
do forage/livestock research, ability to secure external funds 
and to communicate effectively are essential. Start up package 
available that includes graduate student support, summer salary
and operating funds. Submit letter of application, transcripts 
and three reference letters to Barton Baker, Director, Division of 
Plant and Soil Sciences, West Virginia University, P.O. Box 6108, 
Morgantown, WV 26506-6108. Phone 304-293-4817. Electronic 
applications will not be accepted. Application screening will begin
12/15/2007 with anticipated starting date of 5/16/2008. West 
Virginia University is an equal opportunity/affirmative action 
employer.
Saskatchewan—Biometrician. The Department of Plant Sciences
at the University of Saskatchewan invites applications for 
a biometrician. This tenure track position provides expertise 
in quantitative analysis and statistical methodology that is required
in almost all of the research conducted in the Depart-
ment. The Department of Plant Sciences is a centre for teaching, 
research and outreach related to the development, production 
and management of field and horticultural crops and to the 
management of non-arable land on the Canadian prairies. The 
department is currently composed of 24 faculty members, including
eight research scientists and a Director associated with 
the Crop Development Centre. To support its research activities, 
the department employs 20 term research associates and postdoctoral
fellows, and 100 support staff. It has access to a land 
base of 2,400 acres, 12,000 sq. ft of greenhouse space, field laboratories,
seed storage areas, a seed cleaning plant, a controlled 
environment growth facility, and the Canadian Light Source, 
Canada’s recently opened synchrotron, the most ambitious science
project in Canada in a generation. Duties:  The successful 
candidate will develop a strong, externally funded independent 
research program in statistical analysis and/or modeling of biological
systems that will complement current research interests 
in the Department of Plant Sciences and the College of Agriculture
and Bioresources. Specific areas of research are flexible and 
may include application of quantitative analysis, experimental 
design, spatial statistics, multivariate statistics or other areas of 
related expertise. The research conducted should be eligible for 
Government of Canada Tri-Council funding. The appointee will 
teach biometrics and applied statistics at the undergraduate and 
graduate level. Development and delivery of courses in other 
areas related to the individual’s expertise and contribution to 
delivery of the core curriculum of the department will be encouraged.
Supervision of M.Sc. and Ph.D. students is required. 
Qualifications:  This position requires a Ph.D. in plant science, 
botany, genetics or related field with training and experience 
in experimental design, spatial and multivariate statistics; or a 
Ph.D in Statistics, with training or experience in applied statistics
in the biological sciences.  Postdoctoral experience is desir-
able. Excellent communication and interpersonal skills, a commitment
to achieving excellence in teaching, a willingness to be 
involved in limited internal consulting activities, and an ability 
to establish effective working relationships are essential. Applications,
including a CV, academic transcripts, statement of teach-
ing experience and contact information for three referees should 
be submitted to Dr. Bruce Coulman, Head, Department of Plant 
Sciences, University of Saskatchewan, 51 Campus Drive, Saskatoon,
SK, Canada S7N 5A8. Tel: (306) 966-5857. E-mail: bruce.
coulman@usask.ca. More information about the University of 
Saskatchewan, College of Agriculture and Bioresources, and 
the Department of Plant Sciences can be found at http://www.
agbio.usask.ca. Applications should be received by January 30, 
2008. The University of Saskatchewan is committed to employment
equity and applications from women, aboriginal peoples, 
visible minorities and persons with disabilities are encouraged. 
All qualified individuals are invited to apply, but Canadian citizens
and permanent residents will be given priority.
Postdoctoral Positions
Arkansas—Post Doctoral Associate: Environmental Watershed
Management. The Division of Agriculture, University of 
c
A
reer &
 e
D
u
c
A
tio
N
  CSA News V52 N12 December 2007 
Arkansas is inviting applications for a Post Doc Associate to 
be located on the University campus at Fayetteville, Arkansas. 
The successful candidate will conduct laboratory, field plot and 
farm scale research to develop and assess innovative Conservation
Practices aimed at decreasing nutrient loss (particularly 
P) in runoff from poultry – beef farming systems in Northwest 
Arkansas. The candidate will function as an independent researcher
within an internationally renowned research group at 
the University of Arkansas that is evaluating and demonstrating
the nutrient reduction efficiencies of Conservation Practices 
with the context of verifying nutrient management planning 
impacts on the remediation of impaired waters at farm and 
watershed scales in the Southern Plains region in general and 
Arkansas, specifically. A PhD in soil and water sciences or agricultural
engineering, strong written and oral communication 
skills, demonstrated publication record and experience with 
determining the impacts of watershed management on nutrient 
loss agricultural lands to surface and ground waters. Additional 
experiences that would be preferred include: demonstrated interaction
with farming communities, on-farm research experi-
ence, innovative P tracer techniques (e.g., O19:P ratios, sediment 
fingerprinting, rare-earth element analysis). Will be responsible 
for analyzing data, presenting data at professional meetings, 
and writing and publishing results in appropriate journals in 
collaboration with other scientists on the project. Please send 
applications, statement of interest, curriculum vitae, and names 
and addresses of three references to: Dr. Andrew Sharpley, c/o 
Gloria Fry, Department of Crop, Soil, and Environmental Sciences,
115 Plant Science Building, University of Arkansas, Fay-
etteville, AR 72702; or email sharpley@uark.edu. Applications 
will be reviewed starting 30 November, 2007 and will continue 
until a suitable candidate is selected. The University of Arkansas
is an equal opportunity, affirmative action institution. All 
applicants are subject to public disclosure under the Arkansas 
Freedom of Information Act and persons hired must have proof 
of legal authority to work in the United States.
Assistantships
California—Graduate Student Research Assistantships: Plant 
Sciences. The Department of Plant Sciences, University of California-Davis,
has 10 fully funded Graduate Student Research 
Assistantships (M. Sc. and Ph.D.) available in 2008 for highly 
qualified students in the areas of plant genetics and breeding, 
agronomy, agroecology, restoration ecology and management, 
plant biology, postharvest biology, horticulture, and plant 
physiology. For more details and details on the application process
see www.plantsciences.ucdavis.edu/plantsciences/grad_ 
studies/raships.htm.
Iowa—Graduate Assistantships: Plant Breeding. Two Ph.D. assistantships
available at Iowa State University, Ames. A research 
and education team is being assembled for association mapping 
of Beta-glucan in oat germplasm for food and nutritional function.
Cutting-edge marker technologies and statistical analyses 
will be applied. Educational materials on plant breeding and 
marker-assisted selection will be developed. An M.S. degree in 
plant breeding, genetics, or closely related field with a strong 
background in math is preferred. A demonstrated interest in 
working on educational projects is desired. For more information,
please contact Dr. Lance Gibson, Department of Agronomy, 
lgibson@iastate.edu.
Iowa—Graduate Assistantship: Plant Breeding. One M.S. or 
Ph.D. assistantship at Iowa State University, Ames. A research 
team is being assembled to explore the interactions between 
corn and living mulch systems. The project will identify living
mulch systems compatible with corn production, study the 
management and upkeep of living mulch plantings, and breed 
corn germplasm suitable for living mulches. An M.S. or B.S. degree
in plant breeding, agronomy, or related biological sciences 
with a strong background in basic sciences is preferred. Assistantship
begins Fall of 2008. Application deadline is December 
31, 2007. Contact Dr. Kendall Lamkey, Department of Agronomy, 
krlamkey@iastate.edu.
Iowa—M.S./Ph.D. Assistantships: Soybean production. 
Two M.S. or Ph.D. research assistantships are available in the 
crop production and physiology program in the Department 
of Agronomy at Iowa State University. Research involves soybean
production issues related to no-tillage soybean production 
practices and the effect of growth and development changes on 
grain composition and yield of specialty soybean. A B.S. degree 
in agronomy, plant physiology, horticulture, entomology, plant 
pathology, or closely related field with a strong background in 
production agriculture is preferred. Assistantships include salary
and tuition. Premium assistantships are available for supe-
rior candidates. For more information, please contact Dr. Palle 
Pedersen, Department of Agronomy, palle@iastate.edu. Applications
are due Feb. 1.
Tennessee—5 GTA Positions: Earth Science. The Department 
of Earth and Planetary Sciences at the University of TennesseeKnoxville
has 5 Graduate Teaching Assistantships available 
starting in January 2008. These positions carry a competitive 
stipend and a tuition waiver. Candidates should have an undergraduate
degree in Geology, a good command of the Eng-
lish language, and must be eligible to enroll as either a M.Sc. 
or Ph.D. student in our Graduate School. Students with records 
of academic excellence in related disciplines such as Geography 
and Soil Science will also be considered. Possible areas of study 
include hydrogeology, geochemistry, near surface geophysics, 
planetary geology, stratigraphy/sedimentology, or tectonics. 
Please visit our website (http://web.eps.utk.edu) for information
on faculty research interests and how to apply.
Wisconsin—Graduate Assistantship: Invasive Grass Identity. 
Wisconsin-Research Assistantship in Molecular Identification of 
Invasive Grasses. One assistantship will be available at the University
of Wisconsin-Madison beginning autumn 2008 (could 
delay until Jan. 2009) for a Ph.D. student, possibly M.S., to identify
grasses using molecular tools such as AFLPs, SCARS, SNPs. 
Prior experience with molecular analysis is desirable. The project
is part of a multi-state effort to document the invasiveness 
and genetic relatedness of amenity grasses into natural areas. 
The student will gain experience in the use of molecular tools 
to identify species and varieties and insights into grass ecology.
Depending on interests, the student may also spend some 
time collecting unknown grasses from natural or environmentally
sensitive areas. For more information contact Dr. John Stier, 
Horticulture Dept., Univ. of Wisconsin-Madison, 1575 Linden 
Dr., Madison, WI, 53706 or at jstier@wisc.edu or 608-262-1624.
Wyoming—MS or PhD Graduate Assistantship: Plant Sciences.
For more information, contact: Dr. Justin Moss, University of 
Wyoming Sheridan Research and Extension Center, 663 Wyarno 
Road, Sheridan, WY 82801, 307-737-2415, jmoss@uwyo.edu.c
A
re
er
 &
 e
D
u
c
A
ti
o
N
Postings updated daily at www.careerplacement.org/
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 7
Certification Explained
by Luther Smith
Certification, license, and reg-istration are not the same thing, and sometimes they 
are incorrectly used interchangeably. 
Though the differences are slight, 
they are important.
A certification, like that offered 
by ASA and SSSA, is a voluntary, 
professional designation typically 
offered by a not-for-profit organization.
The key word here is “volun-
tary.” It is a standard of practice and 
conduct that those in the profession 
agree to uphold. It can be endorsed 
by government agencies to perform 
specific functions, adding more creditability
to the credential. The same 
government agency could also write 
it into regulatory rules, making it 
mandatory for those specific practices.
A license is a mandatory require-
ment to practice in the stated profession.
It is administered by a state 
government agency. The key word 
here is “mandatory,” and that is the 
primary difference between a certification
and a license. A person does 
not practice in the profession unless 
they have the license to do so.
A registration is the third type that 
is less commonly used but can have 
features similar to certification and/
or a license. A registration is a list of 
people who have met the described 
standard or have the ability to perform
the stated functions. It can be 
maintained by a government agency, 
making it more like a license but not 
as strong as a license, or it can be 
maintained by a membership organization,
making it more like a certifi-
cation. How strong it is depends on 
who maintains it.
Does the Difference Matter?
Does it really matter which one 
is used? The primary function of a 
license is to “protect the public welfare,
property, health and safety.” 
Protecting the public is a function of 
state government; hence, a license 
is issued by a state agency. It is the 
strongest version of a professional 
credential.
Though it might seem like semantics,
it is important not to use these 
titles interchangeably. The CCA, 
CPAg, CPSS, and 
CPSC are certifications
offered by 
ASA and SSSA. 
They are not licenses.
Though 
there are several 
states that now 
have soils licensing,
that is not 
the same thing as the CPSS or CPSC 
designations. It takes a legislative act 
to create a license, and those who do 
not have the license do not practice.
Continuing Education Reminder
As we close out 2007, the continuing
education requirements for 
those ending their two-year cycle 
are due. A total of 40 CEUs must be 
earned by 31 December. CCAs need 
to also have at least five CEUs in 
each of the four competency areas 
of nutrient management, soil and 
water management, integrated pest 
management, and crop management. 
At least 20 of the 40 CEUs must be 
board-approved with no more than 
20 self-study CEUs. There is no limit 
on professional development as long 
as the other requirements are met, 
and all CCAs can self-report up to 20 
CEUs.
CPAg, CPSS, and CPSC also have 
a minimum total requirement of 40 
CEUs. All CEUs can be self-reported 
by using the form on the website. 
CEUs can be earned in four areas: 
professional meetings (has no limits), 
self-directed study (has a maximum 
of 20), author/educational materials 
(has a maximum of 10), and community
service (has a maximum of 10). 
All items need to be educational and 
related to the profession.
You can check how many CEUs 
you have on record by logging in to 
the website as well as find more details
about the requirements.
c
A
reer &
 e
D
u
c
A
tio
N
Certification
Newly Certified Members
(includes those that have added additional certifications 
since the last issue)
Associate Professional Soil Scientist (APSS)
Laura Brock, Seattle, WA
Cynthia Flint, Seattle, WA
Certified Crop Adviser (CCA)
Shaun Blaser, Rexburg, ID
Nicholas Hanigan, Coweta, OK
George Hitz, Fairbanks, AK
Scott Kluesner, Farley, IA
Michael McKibben, Kansas City, MO
Robert Mikkelsen, Merced, CA
Certified Professional Soil Classifier (CPSC)
Justin Fisher, Knoxville, TN
Certification 
Exams
CCA/Agronomy 
Exam
1 Feb. 2008 (Registration
deadline: 
14 Dec. 2007). See 
www.agronomy.
org/cca/exams.
html
Certified Professional
Soil Scien-
tist Exams
21 Mar. 2008. See 
www.soils.org/
csse/ L. Smith, Director of Certification Programs; 
lsmith@agronomy.org.
  CSA News V52 N12 December 2007 
Scholarships Offered in 2008
Applications are being accepted for undergraduate and graduate students wishing to be selected for scholarships offered by ASA, CSSA, or SSSA. Eligibility
requirements and application procedures can be 
found at www.agronomy.org/awards, www.crops.org/
awards, and www.soils.org/awards. Applications are 
due 19 Feb. 2008 unless otherwise noted. Scholarships are 
funded by private gifts to the Agronomic Science Foundation
(ASF). 
American Society of Agronomy
J. Fielding Reed Scholarship. Offered to an outstanding
undergraduate senior pursuing a career in soil or plant 
sciences. The scholarship recognizes Dr. Reed’s lifelong 
commitment to advancing the knowledge of agriculture 
through his work in soil science and natural resources and 
his passion for educating students. The scholarship is in 
the amount of $1,000.
Hank Beachell Future Leader Scholarship. Given to 
an undergraduate student to expand his/her agricultural 
knowledge by participating in activities that enhance his/
her university studies. It recognizes Hank Beachell’s lifelong
commitment to advancing the knowledge of agricul-
ture through his work in rice breeding and development. 
The scholarship is in the amount of $3,500.
Frank D. Keim Fellowship. Awarded to a recipient 
of the 2007 National Student Recognition Program who 
will go on to pursue a graduate degree. The purpose of 
this fellowship is to increase the prestige of this program 
and to honor the unparalleled academic advising of the 
late Frank D. Keim from the University of Nebraska. One 
$2,500 scholarship is offered per year.
Cross-Cultural Experience Program. Provided to an 
undergraduate student going on an international summer 
or semester abroad program. The program provides an 
opportunity to learn more about agricultural sciences and 
to live and learn with students of another culture and language.
The scholarship is made available in the amount of 
$2,500 per year. Applications are due 21 Oct. 2008.
Crop Science Society of America
Gerald O. Mott Scholarship. Provided to a meritorious
graduate student who has completed one year of 
work leading to an M.S. or Ph.D. degree within any divisional
areas of CSSA and has outstanding potential for 
leadership. The scholarship was established in memory 
of Gerald O. Mott. Two $2,500 scholarships will be offered 
in 2008.
Soil Science Society of America
Francis and Evelyn Clark Soil Biology Scholarship. 
Awarded to a student enrolling in graduate study in soil 
biology. The scholarship was established in honor of Dr. 
Clark’s outstanding research, which led to greater understanding
of soil, plant, and microbial interactions and 
of nutrient cycling in terrestrial ecosystems. One $1,000 
scholarship is offered per year.
Select Top Grads for Mott Award
The Gerald O. Mott Meritorious Graduate Student 
Award in Crop Sciences is provided annually by CSSA 
to one graduate student per department in a crop science 
discipline offering a graduate program. Students must be 
enrolled in a U.S. college/university, and the recipients of 
this award will be eligible for consideration for the Gerald 
O. Mott Scholarship.
Candidates for this award must have completed at least 
one year of graduate work leading to an M.S. or Ph.D. degree
in a field of emphasis within any crop science–related 
discipline.
Departments shall select a recipient using any process 
fitting the institution. The principal criteria are
  Academic achievements, honors, and awards (25 
points)
  Research/teaching contributions (25 points)
  Leadership accomplishments in academic and professional
capacity (25 points)
  Service activities (5 points)
  Personal qualities (20 points)
For a complete description of the award and submission,
go to www.crops.org. Submission deadline is 8 Jan. 
2008. Students selected for the award are encouraged to 
apply for the Mott Scholarship.
Recognize Outstanding Seniors for 
National Student Recognition Award
The annual National Student Recognition Program is 
now accepting names and photos of outstanding seniors 
at a four-year institution and second-year students at a 
two-year institution that has an active chapter affiliated 
with the Students of Agronomy, Soils, and Environmental 
Sciences (SASES). ASA, CSSA, and SSSA are sponsors of 
the program. Students selected and going on to graduate 
school will be eligible to apply for the 2008 Frank D. Keim 
Fellowship. 
Students should be selected by a committee of at least 
three faculty members appointed by the head or chair of 
the department. Chapter advisors are encouraged to be 
members of the committee.
Criteria to select students include:
  Scholarship—50% 
  Leadership activities—35% 
  Personal traits—15% 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
c
A
re
er
 &
 e
D
u
c
A
ti
o
N
Student & Career Activities
 December 2007 V52 N12 CSA News 
Students selected will receive a laser-engraved, wooden 
plaque and will be announced in the April issue of CSA 
News. The deadline to submit names and photos of outstanding
students is 8 Jan. 2008. Submit the following in-
formation to Leann Malison at lmalison@agronomy.org:
  Student name (as it should appear on the plaque) 
  SASES chapter and school names 
  Mailing address to send the plaque
  Student email address 
  Student photo, as an email attachment in a 300 dpi 
TIF or JPG file 
  Faculty advisor name and email address
Region 5 Soil Judging Contest
The Region 5 Soil Judging Contest was held 4 Oct. 2007 
in southwestern Iowa, with 40 students from seven universities
participating. The contest was hosted by Iowa 
State University in cooperation with the Natural Resources
Conservation Service. Kansas State University placed 
first overall, followed by Iowa State University in second 
place, and the University of Minnesota in third place. The 
University of Minnesota placed first in the group judging 
part of the contest. Other teams participating in the event 
included the University of Missouri, Missouri State University,
Northwest Missouri State University, and South 
Dakota State University.
•
•
•
•
•
•
TOP: The first-place team at the Region 5 Soil Judging Contest 
from Kansas State University (l to r): Scott Dooley (assistant 
coach), Paul Hartley, Leah Ferdinand, Ryan Cyr, Angela Tran, 
Andy Newkirk, Kelsey McGie, Andrew McGowan, Adam 
Heitman, and Mickey Ransom (coach). BOTTOM: The top five 
individuals in the contest (l to r): Tim Devaney, Missouri State 
Univ. (5th); Adam Heitman, Kansas State Univ. (4th); Andrew 
McGowan, Kansas State Univ. (3rd); Grant Nelson, Iowa State 
Univ. (2nd); and Nick Ihde, Iowa State Univ. (1st).
c
A
reer &
 e
D
u
c
A
tio
N
 To submit an abstract go to:
https://www.acsmeetings.org/programs/technical/abstract-management/ 
5–9 October|Houston, Texas
First Call for Abstracts
2008 Joint Meeting
The Geological Society of America
Soil Science Society of America
American Society of Agronomy
Crop Science Society of America
Golf Coast Association of Geological Societies
Submission Opens January 21
Closes April 1 at 11:59 PM EDT
 Put Your Passion to Work
Imagine Growing Together
At Monsanto, we’re passionate about using science and technology to improve agriculture. We invest about $1.5 million a day to look for and
bring to market the innovative technologies that our customers tell us make a difference.  It’s research that’s about more than just biotechnology. We
use many tools – like genomics, conventional and molecular breeding, crop analytics, animal productivity, chemistry and biotechnology – to bring
forward new products to answer our customers’ needs, in turn, providing benefits to not only the farmer, but processors and consumers as well. 
At Monsanto, we believe in – 
INNOVATION IN AGRICULTURE
Advanced science and innovative technology are at the heart of our company. We are committed to developing science-based solutions to make
our farmer customers more productive and profitable. Our employees are making a difference by feeding the world while preserving the
environment.
EXCELLENCE
People at Monsanto are driven to do extraordinary things and are dedicated to being the best in our industry. 
GREAT WORKING RELATIONSHIPS
Monsanto is team based with highly qualified professionals sharing knowledge, creating a great place to work and allowing employees to take
ownership for results. 
We currently have exciting opportunities in the following positions as well as many others throughout the U.S. and worldwide.
YIELD DISCOVERY & ARADIDOPSIS PIPELINE LEAD
Req. # mons-00006692
Develop & implement a strategy for yield gene discovery. Ph.D. in Plant Biology, Molecular Biology, Genomics, Physiology, Biochemistry or a
related field, and 5+ yrs. research exp.
RESEARCH SCIENTIST - NITROGEN
Req. # mons-00007526
Increase yield through nitrogen use efficiency. PhD degree in Plant Science, Genetics, Biology, Molecular Biology, Biochemistry, or other related field
& 5+ yrs. of research exp. in nitrogen biology in plants, especially in the areas of nitrogen utilization, metabolism, or carbon/nitrogen regulation.
CROP PHYSIOLOGY RESEARCH SCIENTIST
Req. # mons-00007373
Coordinate & execute high-throughput field experiments. Ph.D. degree and 2+ yrs. of related exp.
CORN TRAIT DEVELOPMENT ABIOTIC STRESS LEAD
Req. # mons-00007372
Coordinate and lead event evaluation research aimed at increasing yield in corn. Ph.D. degree in Agronomy, Plant Physiology, Genetics or a
related field and have relevant field experiences.
CROP PHYSIOLOGY RESEARCH ASSOCIATE
Req. # mons-00007430
Conduct field & greenhouse experiments to characterize plant responses to abiotic stress. M.S. or B.S. degree w/3+ yrs. of related exp.
LIMS DEVELOPER/SOFTWARE ENGINEER
Req. # mons-00007449
Advance our LIMS (Laboratory Information Management System). M.S. or B.S. degree in an IT or science-related major and 3+ yrs. exp.
BIOTECHNOLOGY & BREEDING BUSINESS ANALYST
Req. # mons-00007287
Join the newly emerging field of IT systems informatics and play a key role in defining and delivering breakthrough science in high throughput
R&D platforms for Monsanto. We offer extensive training to outfit graduates in Biological Sciences, Agronomy, Plant Breeding or related discipline
to excel in this exciting new area.
Come and Grow with Us!
To learn more about Monsanto, 
our passion & our opportunities, visit:
www.monsanto.com
Voted Top 10 Employers Worldwide by Science Magazine
EEO/AA EMPLOYER M/F/D/V
UT.8801720.10.23.am.qxd  10/31/07  11:25 AM  Page 1
 
