Appropriating Universality  41
0026-3079/2007/4801-041$2.50/0    American Studies, 48:1 (Spring 2007): 41-62
41
Appropriating Universality:
The Coltranes and 1960s Spirituality
Franya Berkman
 Even though many African American jazz musicians have acknowledged the 
role of spirituality in their creative process, jazz scholars have tended to neglect 
this important context. More commonly, they have situated jazz, particularly 
in the 1960s, within the Civil Rights Movement and have focused on issues of 
political oppression.1 An examination of the artists John and Alice Coltrane, 
however, suggests the limitation of exploring 1960s jazz solely within this political
framework. Their compositional titles and their extensive commentary in 
interviews and in liner notes from the mid-’60s onward stressed the personal and 
the spiritual, not the explicitly political. Of course, I do not mean to suggest that 
the religious and political facets of culture stand at oppositional poles. Rather, 
they should be viewed “as bands in a single spectrum” (Ellwood 1994:9). This is 
particularly true in an examination of both African American musical and political 
culture, where the divide between the sacred and secular has been historically 
nebulous.
	 The	role	of	the	Black	Protestant	Church	has	figured	prominently	in	scholarly	
discussions of African American music culture, and to some extent its importance
has been explored with respect to jazz.2 However, with the exception of 
the	Nation	of	Islam,	the	influence	of	Eastern	religious	practices	among	black	
Americans	has	not	been	significantly	researched	nor	have	adequate	connections	
been made between these spiritual pursuits and the musical innovations they 
inspired.3 Nevertheless, since the mid-’60s, black American artists have explored 
Yoga, Hinduism, various sects of Buddhism, Ahmadiya Islam, and Bahá’í. The 
aesthetic impact of these pursuits has been multi-dimensional and far-reaching. In 
 42  Franya Berkman
their study of Asian philosophy and religion, jazz musicians have been exposed 
to the sounds and musical processes they have discovered in the cultures from 
which	these	traditions	have	emerged.	One	can	hear	this	influence	in	musical	borrowings,
such as the use of traditional instrumentation, the reworking of melodic 
material from folk and classical genres, and the incorporation of indigenous 
improvisational	and	compositional	 techniques.4 Though less audible, Eastern 
spiritual	 traditions	have	 also	 exerted	 a	more	 abstract	 philosophical	 influence	
that has shaped jazz aesthetics, inspiring jazz musicians to dissolve formal and 
stylistic boundaries and produce works of great originality.5 Contextualizing 
the spiritual explorations of John and Alice Coltrane within American religious 
culture and liberation movements of the 1960s, this essay explores the way that 
their eclectic appropriation of Eastern spiritual concepts and their commitment 
to spiritual universality not only inspired musical innovation, but also provided 
a	counter-hegemonic,	political,	and	cultural	critique.
Spiritual Jazz
 John Coltrane (1926–1967) needs little introduction; he is widely regarded 
as	one	of	 the	great	 innovators	of	modern	 jazz	and	 the	most	 influential	 saxophonist
since Charlie Parker. There are a considerable number of John Coltrane 
biographies, each of which takes up, to some extent, his spiritual disposition and 
the importance of his religious pursuits during the sixties.6 Most biographers 
stress	 the	 influence	 of	 his	 religious	 upbringing—his	 father	was	 a	Methodist	
minister—and	his	exploration	of	various	non-Western	religions.7 Few scholars, 
however, have seriously considered Alice Coltrane’s musical contributions, her 
role	as	his	spiritual	and	musical	partner,	or	how	her	subsequent	career	as	a	composer,
multi-instrumentalist, and spiritual teacher can be seen as a continuation 
of his legacy.8
 Née Alice McLeod (Detroit, 1937–2007), Ms. Coltrane began the study of 
classical piano and harmony at the age of seven; as a teen, she developed her 
skills playing hymns, anthems, and gospel music for black congregations in Detroit,
as well as bebop in Detroit’s thriving jazz clubs of the 1950s. In 1963, after 
playing	professionally	with	such	figures	as	Lucky	Thompson,	Johnny	Griffin,	
and	Terry	Gibbs,	she	met	and	soon	married	John	Coltrane.	In	1965,	she	replaced	
McCoy	Tyner	as	pianist	in	his	quartet.	After	her	husband’s	death	in	1967,	she	
remained fully committed to a form of musical expression that was simultaneously
devotional	and	avant-garde.	During	her	abbreviated	but	prolific	tenure	as	
a	commercial	recording	artist	for	the	Impulse	and	Warner	Brothers	labels,	she	
continued	the	exploration	of	free	rhythm,	rapidly	shifting	modality,	and	flexible	
formal structures that she began with her husband. Alongside pieces for piano 
and small jazz combo reminiscent of her earlier work with John Coltrane, her 
LPs consisted of ethereal meditations for harp, hard-hitting improvisations on 
Wurlitzer	organ,	and	compositions	for	orchestra	and	choir	based	on	the Hindu 
devotional hymns known as bhajans. 
 Appropriating Universality  43
 In 1976, Alice Coltrane had a mystical experience in which she received 
divine instruction to renounce the world and don the orange robes of a swami, or 
spiritual teacher, in the Hindu tradition. Until her recent passing in January 2007, 
she had been the guru at Sai Anantam Ashram, a predominantly African American 
spiritual community in Southern California, where she and her students studied 
the philosophy of Vedanta, and regularly participated in services of devotional 
music that she presided over. This essay, then, highlights Alice Coltrane’s career 
and continued exploration of innovations developed alongside her husband and 
can be seen as a counter-narrative to the typical historical narratives of modern 
jazz,	which	tend	to	define	her	career	as	a	mere	footnote	to	that	of	her	husband.
 Although his canonical status as jazz guru belies the fact, a reputation cemented
by the platinum selling album A Love Supreme (1965), John Coltrane 
was	not	the	first	jazz	musician	to	draw	on	spiritual	subject	matter	for	musical	
inspiration. Other famous jazz composers such as Duke Ellington and Charles 
Mingus had alluded to the black church much earlier in their respective works, 
“The Black and Tan Fantasy” and “Prayer Meeting.” In the late 1950s, this trend 
became increasingly popular as hard-bop players drew consistently from the 
gospel genre in order to differentiate and reclaim their music from that of the 
white “cool school.”9 By the mid-to-late 1960s, however, jazz musicians drew 
not only from African American spiritual traditions, but also from non-Christian, 
non-Western,	even	idiosyncratic,	spiritual	concepts.	In	some	respects,	such	musical
and spiritual explorations of “the East,” of Africa, and of various cosmic 
realms distanced jazz from the traditional Protestant church as the locus of black 
ethnicity. Yet many of the same “functional dimensions” of African American 
sacred music persisted to use Melonee Burnim’s useful term. The new spiritual 
jazz	continued	to	provide	“a	means	of	cultural	affirmation,	individual	and	collective
expression, and spiritual sustenance” (Burnim 1988:112). 
 Nevertheless, within the jazz community, John Coltrane’s spiritual impact 
was singular; he imbued modal and avant-garde jazz improvisation with spiritual 
significance,	and,	in	many	respects,	succeeded	in	creating	a	new	religion	for	jazz	
musicians based on what Ms. Coltrane described as, “the entire experience of 
the expressive self” (Coltrane 2001). Let me offer Alice Coltrane’s recollection 
of playing with her husband:
Of course John Coltrane is the one who inspires everybody, 
if you were fortunate enough to be in his presence in those 
days. He would always encourage you to fully express what 
you had. Not half of it, because it’s not made that way, or 
three	quarters—the	entire	experience	of	the	expressive	self.	
Truth on your instrument. That just opens so many doors, so 
many avenues, so many vistas, so many plateaus. You could 
hear your sound, music, light, coming from the ethereal, 
heavenly	realms.	When	you	played	in	octaves	that	you	would	
never	go—your	bass	area,	and	your	contra-bass	area,	or	your	
 44  Franya Berkman
tenor area. You heard all kinds of things that would have just 
been left alone, never a part of your discovery or appreciation 
(Coltrane, Personal Interview, 2001).
	 It	is	of	great	significance	that	John	Coltrane’s	spiritual	vision	was	inspired	
by a concept of a supreme being more universal and inclusive than the Biblical 
Judeo-Christian tradition of his childhood. By the early 1960s, Mr. Coltrane 
found	strength	and	solace	in	a	well-reasoned,	non-sectarian	view	of	God,	which	
Lewis Porter calls “a kind of universal religion” (1998:211). Included in his 
spirituality was an array of world traditions: Zen, Zoroastrianism, the writings 
of	Yogananda	and	Krishnamurti,	and	a	commitment	to	daily	meditation—all	of	
which he explored with his second wife, Alice Coltrane, who became his partner 
in 1963 and his pianist in 1965.
 In the short time that Alice and John Coltrane were together (July 1963–July 
1967),	John	Coltrane’s	music	changed	dramatically.	When	the	couple	met	backstage
at	New	York	City’s	Birdland	in	July	of	1963—Alice	was	playing	piano	in	
the	Terry	Gibbs’s	band	opening	for	John	Coltrane’s	“classic	quartet”	featuring	McCoy
Tyner,	Elvin	Jones,	and	Jimmy	Garrison—John	Coltrane’s	music	straddled	
a middle ground between the metered, modal music of the jazz mainstream and 
the metrical, formal, and timbral explorations of the avant-garde. By 1965 he 
had assembled a new group for the album Ascension and was committed almost 
exclusively thereafter to playing in free meter with increasingly free harmonic 
structure.10	When	Alice	Coltrane	joined	him	on	the	bandstand	after	giving	birth	
to his three children, he recorded six of the most unconventional and daring 
projects of his career: Cosmic Music (1966), Live at The Village Vanguard Again! 
(1966), Live in Japan (1966), Stellar Regions (1967), Expression (1967), and 
The Olatunji Concert (1967). During this period, the spiritual intent of his music, 
first	revealed	in	the	extensive	liner	notes	of	A Love Supreme in 1965 and in later 
“out” recordings such as Meditation (1965) and Om (1965), became increasingly 
explicit. In an interview in 1988, Alice Coltrane explained their pursuits as a 
couple	during	this	period:	“What	we	did	was	really	to	begin	to	reach	out	and	look	
toward higher experiences in spiritual life and higher knowledge to be obtained 
in spiritual life. This is what we did. And our basic root was, of course, reading 
and hearing discourse, talk by spiritual leaders and teachers, as well as our own 
engagement in meditation” (Brandon 1988).
 By the early 1960s, John Coltrane’s “universal spirituality” became increasingly
fused with his interest in world music, and he developed a multicultural 
theory of musical transcendence that would have a lasting impact on Alice 
Coltrane’s later career.11 In an interview with Nat Hentoff in 1961, Mr. Coltrane 
stated,	“I’ve	already	been	looking	into	those	approaches	to	music—as	in	India	
in	which	particular	 scales	 are	 intended	 to	 produce	 specific	 emotional	meanings.”12
Coltrane was particularly fascinated with the music of the sitar player 
Ravi Shankar, after whom he named his second son. Shankar began concertizing 
in	the	West	in	the	early	1950s	and	almost	single-handedly	popularized	Asian	
 Appropriating Universality  45
Indian classical music in America, inspiring a great many jazz musicians of the 
era.13 He had also befriended Nigerian drummer Babatunde Olatunji, one of the 
first	proponents	of	West	African	traditional	music	in	America,	with	whom	he	
would speak at great length about the correspondences between African tonal 
languages and drumming patterns.14 In summer 1963, the same time he met his 
future wife, he discussed his interest in the magical, healing properties of music 
in an interview with the French press (Clouzet and Delorme 1963:14). 
	 The	 timing	was	 perfect	 for	 his	 unique	 synthesis.	The	modal	 jazz	 forms	
that John Coltrane pioneered with the Miles Davis sextet during the late 1950s 
allowed	 for	 the	 superimposition	 of	 non-Western	music.	The	 static	 harmony	
and	tonic	pedals	that	defined	modal	jazz—found	on	such	albums	as	Milestones 
(1958) and Kind of Blue (1959)—allowed for the incorporation of music that 
relied on a drone or an unchanging tonal center common in Asian and African 
music. By the late 1960s, John Coltrane’s concept of musical transcendence 
became extraordinarily popular. His fans and fellow musicians came to associate 
his spiritual views with the compositional devices he used on the album A Love 
Supreme and in other recordings from this period. Mantra-like melodies, static 
harmony, pentatonic improvisation, dynamic ensemble interaction, and increasing
freedom from metric constraints came to signify both a religious attitude 
and a new ecstatic spiritual practice in its own right. One should keep in mind, 
nevertheless,	that	John	Coltrane	never	applied	non-Western	musical	genres	in	an	
orthodox manner; he took aspects of these traditions and absorbed them in his 
own	jazz-based	modal	structures.	With	their	attendant	transcendent	or	healing	
properties,	these	non-Western	sources	were	filtered	through	a	personal	musical	
and spiritual philosophy of expressing “inner truth.” 
1960s Spirituality
 The personalized, eclectic, and global nature of John Coltrane’s spirituality 
was consistent with the new religious culture of the 1960s. Religion scholars 
have observed a profound transformation in American spirituality during the 
era. Religious identities that had long been rooted in “social sources of denominationalism,”
such as class, region, race, and ethnicity, began to deteriorate as a 
product of greater social mobility in the postwar period.15 Prior to mid-century, 
communities worshiped together “in ethnic enclaves that gave religious practice 
a	distinct	geographic	identity”	(Wuthnow	1998:23).	This	earlier	model	was	one	
in which “family, church, and neighborhood were closely integrated” (Ibid. 20). 
By the sixties this “spirituality of dwelling” gave way “to a new spirituality of 
seeking” in which individuals began to “increasingly negotiate among competing 
glimpses of the sacred” (Ibid. 3).
 Religious practice of the 1960s also became more “inwardly focused” 
(Roof 1999:66); “Search for the spiritual went beyond doctrine, creed, or religion”
and was concerned instead with “an inner world of truth and meaning” 
and “individualized authentic identity.” Philosopher Charles Taylor sees this as 
 46  Franya Berkman
part of America’s “culture of authenticity,” tracing its roots to the rational and 
political individualism of Descartes and Rousseau, the heartfelt yearnings of the 
romantics, the “committed inwardness” of Protestant Christianity, and Herder’s 
eighteenth-century notion that people had individual “essences.” As Taylor puts 
it,
Being true to myself means being true to my own originality, 
and that is something that only I can articulate and discover. 
In	articulating	it,	I	am	also	defining	myself.	I	am	realizing	a	
potentiality that is properly my own. This is the background 
understanding to the modern ideal of authenticity, and to 
the	goals	of	self-fulfillment	or	self-realization	in	which	it	is	
usually couched (Taylor 1991:29).
According	to	Taylor,	this	Western	notion	of	“being	true	to	myself”	was	connected	
to	a	political	and	spiritual	“horizon	of	significance”	during	the	sixties	so	that	
individual expressive acts could “offer a picture of what a better or higher life 
would be” and “a standard of what we ought to desire” (Ibid.).
 Scholars have also observed a renewed interest in Asian religions and their 
American cousins, “harmonial” or “metaphysical religions.” Interest in Asian 
Indian	 spiritual	 traditions	 can	be	 traced	 to	 the	Transcendentalists,	 influential	
thinkers	such	as	Ralph	Waldo	Emerson	and	Henry	David	Thoreau,	who	mixed	
together elements from a variety of religious sources in their writing. In particular, 
Emerson, in “The Oversoul” (1841) and “Spiritual Laws” (1841), popularized 
the	Indian	metaphysical	belief	that	the	world,	God,	and	human	beings	all	participated
in one substance and that beyond the illusion of matter lay the reality 
of the spirit. Several decades after these essays were published, Russian émigré 
Helena Blavatsky founded the Theosophical Society whose mission, among 
other things, was the study of comparative religions. Blavatsky invited Swami 
Vivekananda,	the	first	Hindu	monk	to	lecture	in	the	United	States,	at	the	World	
Parliament	of	Religions,	an	extension	of	the	1898	Chicago	World’s	Fair.	Also	
in attendance were Buddhist delegates from Sri Lanka and Japan. 
 Perhaps because of its channels in America’s nineteenth-century elite, white 
society, scholars have underplayed the extent to which Asian traditions have 
influenced	blacks	in	the	United	States.	Nevertheless,	there	is	evidence	to	suggest	
that	these	concepts	filtered	into	the	spiritual	philosophies	of	several	black	religious
communities in Harlem during the 1930s. In Mystics and Messiahs: Cults 
and New Religions in American History, Philip Jenkins proposes links between 
late-nineteenth-century “harmonial” movements of New Thought and Theosophy 
and	black	religious	figures	such	as	Father	Divine	and	Sweet	Daddy	Grace.	He	
also points to the highly eclectic and “metaphysical” orientation of such groups 
as	the	Church	of	the	Living	God	and	Negro	Masonry	(Jenkins	2000:101).	
 A more direct cultural encounter with India occurred when Reverend Howard 
Thurman and his wife, musician and social historian Sue Thurman, led a Christian 
 Appropriating Universality  47
Negro	Delegation	to	India	in	1935.	There	they	met	with	Mahatma	Gandhi	and	
conversed at length about religion, colonialism, and racial issues in the United 
States.	Reverend	Thurman’s	 subsequent	writings	were	 greatly	 influenced	by	
Gandhi’s	 commitment	 to	 non-violence.	His	work,	 in	 turn,	 influenced	Martin	
Luther King Jr., who was said to have carried a copy of Thurman’s Jesus and the 
Disinherited (1949) with him in his briefcase.16 Sue Thurman went on to lecture 
“on the beauties of Indian Civilization” and raised funds in these lectures so that 
several African American women could study at Nobel Laureate Rabindranath 
Tagore’s	school	in	West	Bengal.	In	later	years,	Thurman	founded	a	racially	integrated
church, Church for the Fellowship of All Peoples, in San Francisco.17
 During the 1960s, Americans explored Eastern spiritual traditions with new 
vigor, facilitated, in part, by the Asian Immigration Act of 1965, which allowed 
for South and East Asians to bring their daily religion to U.S. soil.18 Technological
advances,	post-war	affluence,	and	media	focus	on	foreign	wars	of	liberation	
also produced a new global exchange in which “religious symbols, teachings, 
and practices” were easily “disembedded,” and “reembedded” into one another, 
resulting in “religious pluralism within the individual,” “bricolage,” and a “mixing
of codes” (Roof 1999:73). 
 These trends in mainstream America held true for black America as well. 
However, the role of religion and the presence of religious leaders in the struggle 
for	civil	rights	brought	a	new	urgency	to	the	issue	of	black	spirituality.	To	quote	
Gayraud	Wilmore,	the	late	1960s	was	“an	unprecedented	era	of	black	theological	
reflection”	(1998:244). The	question	over	the	political	efficacy	of	the	mainstream	
Protestant Church was a topic of enormous debate. Proponents saw the church as 
the wellspring of all black institutions, and one of the richest elements in black 
culture and social organization (Frazier 1964; Fichter 1987). They viewed the 
1960s as a renaissance in which the church could reassume its traditional functions
of challenging the goals of white America. Critics, however, complained 
that the church no longer lived up to the expectations engendered in its past; and 
that its fragmentation and complacency had led it to abandon the black underclass 
which	was	facing	ever-increasing	economic	and	political	hardship	(Washington	
1964; Clark 1964; Cleage 1972). 
 These debates were contemporaneous with the rise of new forms of Afrocentric
spirituality associated with cultural nationalism. The new forms included Ron 
Karenga’s Kwanzaa, an interest in Egyptology and other forms of black religion 
such as Santeria, and, of course, the rise of the Nation of Islam. However, the 
expansion and assertion of black spirituality was not solely limited to a return to 
African roots. For some black Americans, the new spirituality included a journey 
East, to Japan and India, and into the realms of meditation and yoga. 
 This assertion of spirituality, even eclectic and Asian spirituality, was in 
keeping with the politics of Black Power. Though Black Power is typically associated
with the political concerns of African American economic development, 
education,	and	even	armed	self-defense,	it	was	also	concerned	with	defining	and	
asserting	blackness	as	a	cultural	 ideal.	This,	 in	 turn,	 required	a	new	spiritual	
 48  Franya Berkman
foundation.	Members	 of	 the	Black	Arts	Movement—the	 cultural	 arm	of	 the	
Black	Power	Movement—wrote	ardently	about	the	need	for	a	black	spiritual	
culture whose politics were consistent with the revolutionary agenda of Black 
Nationalism. In 1969, writing on the theme of spirituality emerging in the plays 
of	Black	Arts	literary	figures,	Larry	Neal	asserted:
The Old Spirituality is generalized. It seeks to recognize 
Universal Humanity. The New Spirituality is specific. It 
begins by seeing the world from the concise point of view of 
the	colonialized.	Where	the	Old	Spirituality	would	live	with	
Oppression while ascribing to the oppressors an innate goodness,
the New Spirituality demands a radical shift in point of 
view. The colonized native, the oppressed must, of necessity, 
subscribe to a separate morality. One that will liberate him and 
his people (1989:77).
 In an essay from 1968 called “The Religion of Black Power,” Vincent 
Harding enthusiastically proclaimed, “Allah and other gods of Africa enter into 
competition	with	Yahweh,	Jesus,	and	Buddha.	 .	 .	 .	 It	 is	 joyously	difficult	but	
part	of	the	affirmation	of	Black	Power	that	‘we	are	a	spiritual	people.’”	That	
this	simple,	unequivocal	assertion	of	spirituality	was	not	necessarily	bound	to	
Africa as a cultural or geographic homeland opened the possibility of a myriad 
of	forms	that	religion	and	spirituality	could	take.	“We	are	a	spiritual	people”	was	
also	frequently	coupled	with	what	Gayraud	Wilmore	describes	as	“a	new	pride	
in the strange and wonderful beauty of being black and letting it all hang out” 
(1998:225).
 Cultural historian Melanie McAlister has written persuasively on the political 
dimensions	of	African	Americans’	interest	in	non-Western	religions.19 McAlister 
sees such spiritual explorations among black Americans as a way of forming 
“an	alternative	sacred	geography”	that	provides	“alternatives	to	official	policy,	
framing	transnational	affiliations	and	claims	to	racial	or	religious	authority	that	
challenged the cultural logic of American power.” She sees these spiritual pursuits
as part of a larger project that encompasses “a re-visioning of history and 
geography in order to construct a moral and spiritual basis for contemporary 
affiliations	and	identities”	(1999:638).	As	McAlister	wrote:
The attempt to construct a new black culture was deeply intertwined
with the search for religious alternatives to mainstream 
Christianity, a search that included not only Islam, but also a 
renewed interest in the signs and symbols of pre-Islamic and 
traditional African religions (such as the Yoruban religion) and 
the	study	of	ancient	Egypt.	These	influences	were	often	mixed	
together, in Baraka’s thought, as elsewhere, in an eclectic, 
sometimes deliberately mystical, mix (Ibid.).
 Appropriating Universality  49
Alice Coltrane and “Self-Realization”
 By the late 1960s, it appears that Alice Coltrane, like her husband, had come 
to	question	the	Protestant	teachings	of	her	youth	and	to	find	the	Hindu	belief	in	
reincarnation sustaining, particularly after the death of her husband. In 1971, she 
stated,	“The	Western	Church	has	failed,	especially	with	young	people.	It	was	set	
up to serve needs it’s not meeting. Ask a Swami Hindu monk or someone else 
from the East about life after death and you’ll get answers that are real about 
direct	experience,	about	looking	to	God.	It	has	helped	me	to	go	on”	(quoted	in	
Dews 1971:42). In 1970, Alice Coltrane began to attend lectures by Indian guru 
Swami	Satchidananda	on	 the	Upper	West	Side	 of	Manhattan.	When	Swami	
Satchidananda came to the United States in 1967 at age 53, he was already a 
well-known spiritual teacher in his own country. For nearly two decades, he had 
studied and served under Swami Sivananda, whose writings Alice Coltrane had 
read prior to meeting her guru. Swami Satchidananda had also traveled widely 
in India, establishing several branches of Sivananda’s Divine Life Society, an 
organization and network of retreat centers in operation since 1936 committed 
to “a world-wide revival of spirituality through publication of books, pamphlets 
and	magazines	dealing	scientifically	with	all	the	aspects	of	Yoga	and	Vedanta,	
universal religion and philosophy, and ancient medicine” (The Divine Life Society
Website).	At	the	invitation	of	writer	and	filmmaker	Conrad	Rooks,	whom	
he met in 1966 in Sri Lanka, he came to New York City and was the guest of 
artist Peter Max. Satchidananda developed a group of American supporters and 
devotees,	many	of	them	artists	and	intellectuals,	and	quickly	became	something	
of a celebrity. He began lecturing weekly at the Unitarian Universalist Church 
on	the	Upper	West	Side	and,	soon	after,	founded	the	first	Integral	Yoga	Institute	
at	500	West	End	Avenue.	Satchidananda’s	renown	grew	such	that,	in	1968,	he	
was interviewed by Life Magazine	for	their	issue	“The	Year	of	the	Guru”	and	
his	lecture	at	Carnegie	Hall	drew	a	full	house.	He	also	opened	the	Woodstock	
Music and Peace Festival on August 19, 1969. 
 Alice Coltrane found the Vedic concept of “Self-realization” that Swami 
Satchidananda expounded deeply liberating. “Self-realization” is an essential 
doctrine of Advaita Vedanta and one of the philosophical underpinnings of 
Hinduism. Advaita Vedanta is a monistic system of belief, in which the Self 
(Atman) is believed to be identical with the Absolute (Brahman). 20 According to 
Vedanta,	the	Absolute	is	without	any	attributes	or	qualities	that	can	be	specified	
or delimited. However, the Absolute can manifest in partial and lesser forms in 
a multitude of gods and images to which one might offer devotion. Although 
Advaita Vedanta allows for allegiance to many deities, liberation (moksha) is 
to be ultimately attained through knowledge of the Self, which is knowledge of 
the Absolute (Brahman). In an interview conducted in the 1980s with Dolores 
Brandon	for	WBAI,	Alice	Coltrane	explained	the	appeal	of	this	religious	doctrine	
and how it differed from the institutionalized Christianity of her youth: 
 50  Franya Berkman
The Eastern philosophy gives the aspirant the chance or opportunity
to develop himself. . . . Somehow, the experience that 
I had, and I’m not going to speak for everybody, I’m speaking 
for myself . . . you go there and you hear the service and you 
get	 the	 instructions:	 prayer,	 to	 be	 faithful,	 trust,	 ask	God’s	
blessings.	Yet,	it	never	tells	you	what	you	can	become—More	
Christ-like, more Christ Conscious! There are certain wonderful
statements	made	by	Christ,	“Greater	works,	shall	ye	also	
do” “I and my father are one.” How is it that you can decide 
how this should be understood? If his word is the law then if 
he	says	“Greater	works	shall	ye	also	do”	let	me	believe	that!	
. . . He told you about your potentiality, your higher spirituality,
but the church says get under that. Be less than. I’m not 
stating we should be more than Christ, but you know really. 
He	says	you	have	a	higher,	a	greater	potentiality.	“I’ve	fed	five	
thousand.	I	want	you	to	feed	five-million!”
To	get	self-realization.	To	get	self-actualization,	fulfillment.	
That’s	the	point.	And	it	isn’t	selfish—that	term.	It	just	means	
that you go to your fullest and highest potential, and not be 
limited by some tenets of some doctrine that says that we 
come here, here’s the minister, and that we pay our tithes and 
go home and go back to your job or business or whatever and 
do everything you want (Brandon 1988).
In its inclusiveness and emphasis on personal potential, the concept of Vedic 
self-realization that Alice Coltrane adhered to was similar to the spiritual and 
creative philosophy that John Coltrane developed. It can also be seen as deeply 
rooted in the “harmonial” traditions of the nineteenth century, and in America’s 
“culture of authenticity.” However, it was now connected to a traceable cultural 
and spiritual lineage and a set of yogic disciplines that Alice Coltrane subsequently
took	up.	
Totality Concept
 In the introduction to the album Universal Consciousness (1971),	the	first	LP	
that Alice Coltrane (now known by her new spiritual name Turiya) recorded after 
her	first	trip	to	India	with	Swami	Satchidananda,	she	emphasized	the	importance	
of her pilgrimage: “Having made the journey to the East, a most important part 
of my Sadhana (spiritual struggle) has been completed.” Her trip to India had a 
dramatic impact on her spiritual evolution and her related aesthetic sensibility. 
Upon returning, her new creative goal surpassed that of making music in a technical
or artistic sense; she was now determined to express “extraordinary transonic 
and atmospherical power,” which could send forth “illuminating worlds of sounds 
 Appropriating Universality  51
into the ethers of this universe.”21 As evidenced on the last group of albums 
she	made	for	Impulse!	and	Warner	Brothers,	Universal Consciousness (1971); 
World Galaxy (1971); Lord of Lords (1972); Eternity (1975); Transcendence 
(1977); Radha Krsna Nama Sankirtana (1977); and Transfiguration (1978), the 
experience of her spiritual awakening could no longer be contained within the 
timbral palette of the jazz rhythm section, even at the latter’s most expressive and 
avant-garde extremes. She began to explore the combined potential of rhythm 
section, orchestral strings, tambura, harp, piano, percussion, and her newfound 
improvisational vehicle, the electric organ. 
 As Alice Coltrane committed herself fully to expressing her experience of 
the Absolute, her compositional sensibility became increasingly daring. I believe 
the artistic originality that emerges in these albums, demonstrated in the analysis 
that follows, was directly related to the ways in which her mystical experiences 
had been validated by her guru and by her experiences in India. In trying to 
express the Absolute, in the sense of Brahman as unbounded, all encompassing, 
and inclusive, she was moved to reach beyond the musical boundaries of the 
jazz genre and fully explore others traditions and styles. 
 After 1971, her commentary in her albums included elaborate descriptions 
of her belief in the stages that the soul passes through in its spiritual evolution, 
the	nature	of	the	outer	galaxies	of	the	universe,	and	conversations	with	the	God	
and his various musical and spiritual emissaries. These exegeses provide a particularly
vivid window into her deepening mysticism and, like her music from 
this period draw from an increasing array of disparate sources.
Figure 1: Alice Coltrane and Swami Satchidananda, Los Angeles, California, 
1972. Copyright © 2008 Philip Melnick.
 52  Franya Berkman
 Starting with the album Universal Consciousness (1971), Alice Coltrane 
began to explore what she termed “a totality concept.” In the liner notes of the 
title track on the album, she explained: 
Universal Consciousness literally means Cosmic Consciousness,
Self-Realization, and illumination. This music tells of 
some of the various diverse avenues and channels through 
which	the	soul	must	pass	before	it	finally	reaches	that	exalted	
state of Absolute Consciousness. Once achieved, the soul 
becomes	re-united	with	God	and	basks	in	the	Sun	of	blissful	
union. At this point, The Creator bestows on the soul many of 
his Attributes, and names one a New Name. This experience 
and this music involve a Totality concept, which embraces 
cosmic thought as an emblem of Universal Sound. 
 On the album Universal Consciousness and, arguably, throughout the rest 
of her recording career, I see Alice Coltrane expressing this “Totality concept” 
by juxtaposing an array of musical identities that might not commonly appear 
together: contrasting instruments, a mix of composition and improvisation, and 
jazz, classical, and world music sonorities. Universal Consciousness displays 
both	the	breadth	and	array	of	compositional	techniques	that	can	be	found	on	her	
recordings between 1971–1978. Two works on the album, “Battle of Armageddon”
and	“The	Ankh	of	Amen	Ra,”	are	duets	for	drum	set	and	Wurlitzer	organ.	
The music that depicts “Battle of Armageddon” is an avant-garde up-tempo 
free-meter duo. Resembling John Coltrane’s composition “Leo” and likewise 
featuring the mercurial drumming of Rashied Ali, the piece is a virtuosic romp 
for both players built on the repeated transposition and rhythmic variation of a 
single motif. “The Ankh of Amen Ra” includes a prayer to Amen-Ra, the Egyptian 
god	of	antiquity,	“Amen-Ra	bear	us	safe	passage	across	the	River	Styx.”	The	
organ theme reverts to a comparatively conventional metered pentatonic melody, 
which Alice Coltrane enhances with electronic effects and a driving, syncopated 
left	hand	figure.	
	 Alice	Coltrane	also	set	the	Wurlitzer	in	other	more	complex	environments	
with a small string section, harp, and rhythm section. For these organ features, 
she	composed	innovative	formal	structures	quite	unlike	typical	jazz	and	blues	
forms. For the track “Universal Consciousness,” she fused the sound of harp and 
strings and contrasted that sonority with the organ, producing an overall ABA 
free-meter form with her up-tempo keyboard playing sandwiched in the middle. 
(In this case, ABA form refers to a compositional structure based on an opening
musical idea followed by a contrasting section and a return to the opening 
material.) In an otherwise dissonant environment, several precomposed violin 
figures	provide	the	organizational	framework	for	the	“A	section.”	The	first	is	a	
tremulous	figure	that	gradually	becomes	longer	and	more	complex.	The	second	
figure	is	a	sustained	unison	that	has	the	effect	of	neutralizing	the	previous	agita-
 Appropriating Universality  53
tion,	and	the	third	is	a	bold,	angular	motive.	After	the	second	figure	is	stated,	the	
strings individuate, so that each of the four violin players (LeRoy Jenkins, Julius 
Brand, Joan Kalisch, and John Blair) explore different musical identities such as 
pizzicato, arco scrubbing effects in the middle and lower registers, harmonics, 
and	free	melodic	improvisation.	While	the	strings	play,	Alice	Coltrane	complements
the activity with unifying arpeggios on the harp. According to her liner 
notes,	these	three	tracks	each	display	the	arduousness	of	spiritual	purification.
	 Countering	 the	fierceness	 of	 these	 tracks	 are	 three	 others—“Oh	Allah,”	
“Hare	Krishna”	and	“Sita	Rama”—that	portray	more	reflective,	meditative	states.	
In	the	liner	notes	Alice	Coltrane	states,	“‘Oh	Allah’	is	a	prayer	for	peace,	unity	
and	concord.	The	strings	helped	me	to	voice	this	plea:	‘O	Mustafa	Lord	Allah,	
bring	forth	us	all	together	again.	We	can	depend	on	You	to	envelop	us	in	Your	
all-embracing	arms	of	universal	harmony,	 tranquility	and	 love.’”	The	strings	
play twice an evocative metered introduction at the top of their register. Then 
Alice Coltrane establishes a pleasant E-Dorian environment with the sweet and 
tremulous organ melody that she plays upon entering and the two planing chords, 
Em7 and F#m7, which support the organ solo. A conversation between strings 
and	Wurlitzer	ensues,	backed	by	the	rhythm	section.	The	organ	theme	is,	as	she	
indicates, plaintive. 
 “Hare Krishna” and “Sita Rama” are the most strikingly original compositions
on the album. Both are based on traditional Indian chants. During her career 
as a bandleader, Alice Coltrane saw the potential of bhajans as a transcendent, 
avant-garde vehicle for rhythm section and orchestra. Thus, rather than simply 
arranging the traditional hymns, she created a new devotional genre modeled 
as much upon the participatory and functional aspects of the music as the original
melodic material. To the best of my knowledge, no other jazz or classical 
composer has used Indian devotional music in this fashion. In her adaptation of 
“Hare Krishna,” the entire ensemble plays an opening rubato theme in unison 
while Rashied Ali adds a patina of cymbals and bells. The opening melody appears
to be an invocation and could very well match the text “Hare Hare, Hare 
Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama.” The organ enters playing a theme in E major 
while the ensemble sustains a drone. The trills and ornamentation of her melodic 
line depart from both the language of jazz and classical music. They appear to 
be an approximation of gamak,	the	ornamental	figures	that	characterize	Indian	
raga. The organ theme beckons an antiphonal response from the orchestra and a 
second	unison	orchestral	figure	emerges.	Gradually,	Alice	Coltrane’s	organ	solo	
emerges, embracing dissonance. This entire rubato form is then repeated, like a 
song with various strains in which the verse comprises a free jazz environment 
for organ and rhythm section.
 “Sita Rama,” her second bhajan arrangement, is perhaps the most “Indian” 
of her tunes thus far considered. The strings are absent here, and the tambura 
and drums begin by establishing the drone. Another slowly-expanding organ 
improvisation emerges resembling alap, the unmetered melodic exposition of 
raga	in	Indian	classical	music.	This	is	followed	by	a	more	clearly	defined	melody	
 54  Franya Berkman
that	becomes	the	basis	of	improvisation.	This	structure	is	quite	typical	of	Indian	
improvisational music. However, the entire conception is literally “jazzed up” 
with the sound of the rhythm section and overdubbed harp arpeggios. After this 
sonic environment has been established, Alice Coltrane closes with an entirely 
new ethereal musical moment using only harp and percussion.
 One might argue, in a laudatory fashion, that Alice Coltrane’s musical eclecticism
anticipated what is now a rather common post-modern trend of mixing and 
juxtaposing genres from vastly different historical periods and cultural traditions. 
However, as a devotional musician, her compositions lack the oppositional irony 
that one typically associates with post-modern aesthetics. Rather, I would suggest 
that it was her understanding of the Vedic concept of the Absolute, a notion that 
“the paths are many yet the destination one,” and her belief in the concept of 
musical self-realization that inspired her to draw from so many diverse sources 
in her musical composition.
The Political Valence of Spiritual Jazz
 The 1960s are often historicized as an era in which “all over the world chains 
and shackles of a classical imperialist kind were thrown off in a stirring wave 
of	‘wars	of	national	liberation’”	(Jameson	1984:181).	While	such	a	“mythical	
simplification”	masks	the	complexities	of	these	watershed	years,	decolonization	
and third world revolution are crucial to understanding the musical and spiritual 
pursuits	of	the	black	jazz	community	during	the	period	in	question. As Frederic 
Jameson	writes,	“the	sixties	were	a	period	in	which	all	these	‘natives’	became	
human beings, and this internally as well as externally: those inner colonized 
of	 the	first	world—‘minorities,’	marginals,	 and	women,	 fully	 as	much	 as	 its	
external	subjects	and	official	‘natives.’”	This	cultural	shift	has	been	explained	
by numerous scholars in a variety of ways: “the coming to self-consciousness 
of	subject	peoples,”	“the	emergence	of	new	subjects	of	history,”	“the	conquest	
of the right to speak in a new collective voice, never before heard on the world 
stage—and	of	the	concomitant	dismissal	of	the	intermediaries	(liberals,	first-world	
intellectuals)	who	had	hitherto	claimed	 to	 talk	 in	your	name”	(Ibid.).	Global	
contestation of hegemony and the political emergence of subaltern voices produced
an	exchange	of	ideas	across	borders	that	influenced	“First	World”	society	
in	profound	and	lasting	ways.	The	“continuous	exchange	and	mutual	influences	
between the American black movements and the various African and Caribbean 
ones” and cultural and intellectual exchange across other decolonized nationstates
permitted	a	new	traffic	in	arts,	politics,	and	spiritual	practices	and	offered	
new narratives of the past and new visions of the future (Ibid.). 
 Drawing from the work of Pierre Bourdieu, McAlister argues that cultural 
productions make meaning by their “historical association with other types of 
meaning-making	activity”	(2001:8).	She	states,	“we	need	to	‘explain	the	coincidence’
that	brings	specific	cultural	products	 into	conversation	with	specific	
political	discourses”	(2001:7).	While	Alice	Coltrane	and	John	Coltrane	were	not	
 Appropriating Universality  55
explicit about the transnational politics of their music or spirituality, when framed 
within this “global contestation of hegemony” of which Jameson writes, and 
this “alternative sacred geography” of the Black Arts Movement that McAlister 
describes, their explorations are rendered politically meaningful. 
	 One	might	contrarily	argue	that	the	Coltranes’	appropriation	of	non-Western
spirituality constitutes what Edward Said has called, “the phenomenon of 
Orientalism,” whereby the East comes to represent “a place of romance, exotic 
beings, haunting memories and landscapes, remarkable experiences” in the 
Western	imagination	(1979:1).	Like	many	Asian	apologists,	religion	scholars,	and	
spiritual	enthusiasts	from	the	West,	they	have	“focused	on	philosophical	doctrines	
(often in the guise of an ancient wisdom) . . . with little attention directed to more 
difficult	questions	of	the	contexts	of	textual	production	and	circulation”	(Lopez	
1995:7). However, while Alice and John Coltrane may represent Asian spiritual 
doctrine	in	a	reductive	manner,	the	political	agenda	that	defines	Orientalism	and	
the	critical	East–West	distancing	implicit	in	this	relationship	does	not	typify	their	
involvement with Eastern spirituality. Said argues that stereotypes of Oriental 
cultures were used by European powers to colonize the Orient and, further, that 
orientalism is “shot through” with doctrines of “European superiority, various 
kinds of racism, imperialism and the like” (1979:8). By contrast, their musical 
and	spiritual	engagement	with	non-Western	cultures	and	that	of	other	African	
American artists during the 1960s were often part of a lasting engagement with 
the cultures themselves, and can be seen as part of a larger oppositional discourse, 
one	that	has	offered	a	compelling	critique	of	imperialism.	The	emergence	and	
valuation	 of	 “Third	World”	 forms	of	 expression,	whether	 they	 are	 political,	
artistic, or spiritual, provided an important backdrop to the music of the jazz 
avant-garde as it expanded the sources that musicians could draw from and what 
the music could mean in the bigger picture.
	 The	political	ramifications	of	self-realization	should	also	be	included	in	this	
discussion. The notion of expressing an “authentic self” is intrinsic to the musical 
philosophy of John Coltrane, the jazz avant-garde, and, one might argue, jazz in 
general. John Coltrane, and later Alice, encouraged their band members to make 
extraordinarily	personal	statements.	While	the	authenticity	they	sought—“the	
entire	experience	of	the	expressive	self”	and	“truth	on	your	instrument”—was	
intrinsic to their notion of musical and spiritual universality it also had extensive 
political	ramifications	during	the	1960s	as	a	display	of	personal	liberation	and	
black cultural expression. In the comprehensive reorganization of religious and 
political authority during the ’60s, individual, authentic, and spiritually inspired 
jazz music could constitute, symbolically, a form of revolutionary praxis. 
	 As	Henry	Louis	Gates	Jr.	and	others	have	argued,	long	after	the	Enlightenment
era during which political notions of universality such as “abstract indi-
vidual” and “citizen” emerged, people of African decent were not granted such 
status	(Gates	1991:4).	It	was	only	in	the	mid-nineteenth	century	with	the	Abolitionist
Movement that the concept of a black self or a black spiritual birthright 
began to circulate in mainstream America. To be sure, this “perilous journey 
 56  Franya Berkman
from	object	to	subject”	first	documented	in	eighteenth	and	nineteenth	century	
black spiritual autobiographies and slave narratives has been laden with obstacles 
that have stood between the black soul/self and its place in the “absolutes” and 
“inalienables” of Enlightenment universality (Ibid.). In many respects, both John 
and Alice Coltrane’s spiritual testimonials, which are evident in their extensive 
liner	notes	and	their	devotional	music,	find	strong historical antecedents in these 
fraught proclamations of transcendent selfhood that characterize black religious 
and autobiographical writings.22
 As many have argued, it has been the overwhelming burden of subalterns 
to	write	themselves	into	the	Western	narrative	in	order	to	gain	entrance	into	“the	
universal.” In the study of minority discourse, scholars have gone so far as to 
argue that the subaltern cannot speak and that “the minority subject steps into a 
pre-inscribed symbolic” (Palumbo-Liu 1995:193). However, as David PalumboLiu
suggests, “In the face of this Eurocentric universal and the various imperialist 
projects	it	underwrites,	the	minor	has	attempted	to	assert	its	specific	relation	to	
the	universal—it	has	‘written	back’	its	particular	version	of	the	universal	against	
the	empire”	(1995:190).	I	find	it	extremely	interesting	and	valuable	to	explore	
how the Coltranes have appropriated the concept of universality. In so doing, 
they	have	redefined	the	concept	to	include	a	broad,	pluralistic	notion	of	both	
religion and music representative of minority discourses and minority cultural 
expression. 
 To understand how the Coltranes have “written back,” it is important to 
distinguish their concept of spiritual and musical universality from the notion 
of political universality associated with Enlightenment philosophy. The two are 
quite	different	and	should	not	be	confused	as	each	produces	a	different	set	of	
theoretical and actual possibilities. The appeal to universality that emerged as part 
of	Enlightenment	philosophy	eradicates	difference	for	the	sake	of	formal	equality.	
It also masks hierarchical relations between dominant and subordinate cultures, 
languages, and histories. By contrast, as a spiritual concept, the Coltrane’s notion 
of universality welcomes, accepts, and even produces plurality, epitomized by 
the statement that “the paths are many but the destination one.” Their commitment
to spiritual universality can be seen as a counter-narrative to both notions 
of universality associated with Enlightenment thought and the exclusivity of 
monotheistic religious traditions. It has also allowed for new hybrid and global 
aesthetics, beautiful music, and a transnational ethical message that transcends 
the	ethnic	essentialism	and	identity	politics	that	have	influenced	public	culture,	
politics, and scholarship since the late 1960s. 
 Viewing John and Alice Coltrane’s exploration of Eastern spirituality and 
their commitment to avant-garde jazz as a vehicle of self-realization directs attention
from	the	political	rebellion	of	the	period	to	its	equally	important	counterpart,	
spiritual revolution. Exploring the Coltranes’ musical development in this light 
allows us to consider how countercultural spiritual explorations among black 
musicians	 influenced	 the	 aesthetics	 of	 avant-garde	musical	 expression,	 and,	
in	turn,	reveals	the	exceptional	fluidity	of	ritual	practices	in	twentieth-century	
 Appropriating Universality  57
American	society.	While	the	study	of	ritual	practices	has	figured	prominently	
in	both	ethnomusicological	studies	of	non-Western	music	and	in	musicological	
works	devoted	to	Western	art	music	from	past	centuries,	it	has	been	noticeably	
absent in studies of post-’60s jazz and contemporary experimental music. This 
essay calls attention to this largely untapped area of research. There is great room 
for further exploration, particularly in the study of avant-garde jazz musicians 
whose	compositions	and	commentary	frequently	refer	to	spiritual	themes.23 
Notes 
 1.	Two	dominant	and	opposed	methodologies	have	generally	emerged.	The	first	method	of	
scholarship separates the aesthetic from the political. This customarily begins with an initial nod to 
the Civil Rights Movement followed by a retreat into the musician’s work. The advantage of this 
method	is	that	the	black	jazz	musician,	who	has	been	over-determined	as	a	racial	and	political	figure	
through	decades	of	criticism,	acquires	the	status	of	“individual”	and	“genius.”	The	disadvantage	of	
course, is the disavowal of revolutionary cultural shifts that were then shaping artistic production. 
See for example the work of Ekkehard Jost 1974, Roger Dean 1992, and John Litweiler 1993. 
A second scholarly tendency encodes the music with radical meaning. Here writers tend to ally 
musical characteristics such as free rhythm, collective improvisation, and timbral intensity with 
cultural nationalism and black militancy. See for instance the work of Amiri Baraka 1970, Ben 
Sidran 1971, and John Kofsky 1998.
 2. See for instance Murray 1973, Boyer 1977, Levine 1977, and Maultsby 1992.
	 3.	When	scholars	have	ventured	to	discuss	the	complex	relationship	between	sixties	jazz,	
spirituality, and politics, the cultural legacy of the Black Church (Hersh 1996) and the involvement 
of	jazz	musicians	in	the	Nation	of	Islam	have	figured	most	prominently	(Weinstein	1992,	Turner	
1997). Scholars have also called attention to utopian and Zionist visions of life in outer space that 
individual	artists	have	fashioned	for	their	inspiration	(Szwed	1997,	Kelley	2002,	Gilroy	2000).
	 4.	Well-known	jazz	artists	whose	study	of	Indian	spiritual	paths	have	influenced	or	fused	with	
their musical practice include Don Ellis, Paul Horn, and John McLaughlin. For a comprehensive 
overview,	see	Gerry	Farrell’s	“Indian	Elements	in	Popular	Music	and	Jazz”	in	Indian Music and 
the West (1997). Other jazz artists who have explored various sects of Japanese Buddhism and have 
acknowledged	the	aesthetic	influence	of	their	spiritual	practice	in	interviews	and	liner	notes	include	
Herbie	Hancock	and	Wayne	Shorter.	Yusef	Lateef’s	involvement	with	Ahmadiyya	Islam	and	Dizzie	
Gillespie’s	practice	of	Bahá’í	have	surfaced	in	interviews	and	in	biographical	sketches.	
	 5.	With	the	exception	of	Joachim-Ernst	Berendt’s	The World is Sound. Nada Brahma (1991) 
there	are	no	major	writings	that	specifically	address	the	influence	of	non-Western	spirituality	on	jazz	
of the 1960s and 1970s, although a small selection of articles have broached the subject (Monson 
1998), and brief references can be found in topical studies (Budds 1990, Feather 1986).
 6. The major biographies of John Coltrane each discuss his spiritual transformation of the 
sixties (Thomas 1975, Cole 1976, Priestly 1987, Nisenson 1993, Fraim 1996, Porter 1998). For the 
most comprehensive documentation of interviews and actual comments made by John Coltrane on 
the topic, see Lewis Porter’s John Coltrane: His Life and Music (1998). For an interdisciplinary 
exploration	of	John	Coltrane’s	spirituality	that	engages	with	the	political	ramifications	of	his	“love	
ethic” and his eclectic spirituality, see James C. Hall’s “Meditations: John Coltrane and Freedom” 
in Mercy, Mercy Me: African-American Culture and the American Sixties (2001). 
	 7.	His	first	marriage	to	Naima	Coltrane,	a	black	American	Muslim,	should	also	be	mentioned	
here, however, John Coltrane never embraced Islam himself.
 8. With	the	exception	of	my	doctoral	dissertation,	“Divine	Songs:	The	Music	of	Alice	Coltrane”
(2003) there are no full length works devoted to her life and music. Lewis Porter (1998) has 
written	briefly	about	Alice	Coltrane’s	maternal	and	nurturing	influence	on	her	husband,	as	well	as	
their musical compatibility. For a brief, yet thorough article about Alice Coltrane’s life and musical 
career, see David Toop’s “Alice Coltrane: Universal Consciousness” (2002).
 9. “Cool” jazz is a highly amorphous musical category. As a racialized term, it typically refers 
to	the	soft	aesthetics	of	such	white,	“West	Coast”	players	as	trumpeter	Chet	Baker	and	saxophonists	
Stan	Getz	and	Paul	Desmond.	However,	the	concept	of	“cool”	is	also	associated	with	Miles	Davis	
and	his	late	modal	approach	typified	on	the	album	Kind of Blue (1958) as well as Davis’s orchestral 
projects	in	collaboration	with	composer-arrangers	Claude	Thornhill	and	Gill	Evans.	Here,	I	differentiate
works that purposefully make use of the gospel idiom, a sub genre of hard-bop often called 
“soul jazz.”
 10. Despite the diverse styles of post-1950s jazz, avant-garde musicians have been generally 
distinguished from the mainstream-jazz community by their explorations of free meter, free-form, and 
 58  Franya Berkman
group	improvisation.	However,	within	the	first	and	second	generation	of	avant-garde	players,	such	
as Ornette Coleman, Cecil Taylor, and Charles Mingus, and in the music of their disciples, variable 
“formative principles” have distinguished their styles (Jost 1974:9). The aesthetics of “free” music 
have	therefore	been	extremely	difficult	to	categorize	as	a	whole.	David	Such	explains	“free”	jazz	as	
a	general	need	to	lessen	restrictions	on	various	constituent	formal	elements	of	jazz.	He	equates	the	
jazz avant-garde with contemporary movements in modernist painting that have explored texture, 
structure, and new media (1994:28). The free-jazz community has also been associated with a 
post-modern creative philosophy, summarized in statements such as: “free jazz is a music without 
boundaries; or is genre-less, so to speak. Any process of creating, transmitting or learning music, and 
the	assimilation	of	any	external	influence,	from	any	geographical	location,	past,	present,	or	future,	
is possible” (Kiroff 1997:18).
 11. Sun Ra was perhaps the only other jazz musician to attempt this kind of project at the 
time. However, Ra’s personal eccentricities in dress and demeanor, his unconventional intergalactic 
orchestra, and his lack of backing in the recording industry resulted in his comparative obscurity. 
Coltrane	visited	Sun	Ra	several	times	in	Chicago	in	the	late	fifties.	Sun	Ra	claims	that	he	was	the	
first	to	inspire	John	Coltrane	to	follow	this	path	of	musical	and	spiritual	transcendence.	See,	for	
instance, Ra’s commentary in Steve Rowland’s documentary “Tell Me How Long Trane’s Been 
Gone”	(2001).	For	a	comprehensive	study	of	Sun	Ra’s	music	and	his	own	brand	of	mysticism	see	
John Szwed’s Space Is the Place: The Lives and Times of Sun Ra (1997). 
	 12.	 This	quote	is	taken	from	Nat	Hentoff’s	liner	notes	to	the	album	Live at the Village Vanguard 
by John Coltrane.
 13. See Josh Tynan’s “India’s Master Musician” in Downbeat May 6, 1965: 14-16. 
 14. See Olatunji’s remarks in Steve Rowland’s radio documentary “Tell Me How Long Trane’s 
Been	Gone”	(2001).
	 15.	 H.	Richard	Niebuhr	first	articulated	this	manner	of	social	organization	in	his	classic	study,	
The Social Sources of Denominationalism (1929).
 16. See Howard Thurman’s autobiography With Head and Heart (1979).
	 17.	 In	addition	to	these	spiritual	affiliations	with	India,	black	radicals	who	sympathized	with	
India’s struggle for independence from British rule also forged more immediate political allegiances 
in the early part of twentieth century. In The Karma of Brown Folks (2000) Vijay Prashad notes that 
“the	stamp	of	radical	India	was	made	popular	in	the	black	press”	by	such	figures	as	W.	E.	B.	Du	Bois	
who, in 1929 wrote, “the people of India, like American Negroes, are demanding today things, not 
in the least revolutionary, but things which every civilized white man has so long taken for granted, 
that he wishes to refuse to believe that there are people who are denied these rights” (People, January 
10, 1929).
 18. Though dealing almost exclusively with Euro-American culture, several authors have taken 
up	the	issue	of	American	interest	in	eastern	spirituality	during	the	sixties.	See	Cox	1977,	Wuthnow	
1978, 1998, Ellwood 1979, 1987, 1994, Tipton 1982, and Prashad 2000.
	 19.	 While	McAlister’s	focus	is	that	of	the	Nation	of	Islam,	her	insights	and	observations,	can	
be	extended	to	other	forms	of	non-Western	spirituality.
 20. Sri Shankara (788–820 CE), Hindu philosopher and writer, is responsible for establishing 
Advaita Vedanta as the dominant Hindu philosophical tradition.
	 21.	 This	quote	was	taken	from	the	liner	notes	of	Universal Consciousness (1971).
 22. For instance, in his preface to Bearing Witness: Selections from African-American Autobiography
in the Twentieth Century	(1991),	Henry	Louis	Gates	Jr.	asserts,	“Without	the	black	spiritual	
autobiography’s reclamation of the Afro-American’s spiritual birthright, the fugitive slave narrative 
could not have made such a cogent case for black civil rights in the crises years between 1830 and 
1865.” He further explains that even when converted to Christianity “primitives” were “still denied 
formal	recognition	of	their	subjectivity	in	Western	arts	and	letters,	in	jurisprudence,	and	in	all	that	
signals full citizenship” (1991:4).
 23. Interestingly, one sees a similar language of “Self-realization” in comments made by 
other experimental jazz musicians of the late sixties and early seventies as well. In his study of the 
Chicago-based black artists collective the AACM (The Association for the Advancement of Creative 
Musicians),	George	Lewis	calls	attention	to	the	centrality	of	this	concept	among	members.	Lewis	cites	
saxophonist Joseph Jarman in particular, who explained, “up until the late ’sixties, we were always 
categorized, and it was only possible for you to self-realize certain situations. But then we began to 
realize that if you began to self-realize, you became a universal property, and then you must use the 
whole spectrum of conscious reality” (2003:110). Such commentary leads one to believe that this 
spiritual doctrine was pervasive in the post-Coltrane avant-garde jazz subculture and not limited to 
Alice Coltrane and the New York jazz scene. 
Works Cited
 Appropriating Universality  59
Baraka, Amiri [LeRoi Jones]. Blues People: Negro Music in White America. 
New	York:	William	Morrow,	1963.
Bednarowski, Mary Farrell. New Religions and the Theological Imagination in 
America. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989.
Berendt, Joachim-Ernst. The World Is Sound, Nada Brahma: Music and the 
Landscape of Consciousness. Rochester, VT: Destiny Books, 1991.
Berkman, Franya. “Divine Songs: The Music of Alice Coltrane.” PhD diss., 
Wesleyan	University,	2003.
Boyer,	Horace	Clarence.	“Gospel	Music:	Sacred	or	Secular?”	First World 1.1 
(1977): 46-49.
Brandon, Dolores. The Evolution of Alice Coltrane.	New	York:	WBAI,	1988.
Budds, Michael. Jazz in the Sixties. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 
1990.
Burnim,	Mellonee.	 “Functional	Dimensions	 of	Gospel	Music.”	The Western 
Journal of Black Studies 12.2 (1988): 112-121.
Clark, Kenneth. Dark Ghetto.	New	York:	William	Morrow,	1964.
Cleage, Albert. Black Christian Nationalism: New Directions for the Black 
Church.	New	York:	Sheed	and	Ward,	1972.
Clouzet, Jean, and Michael Delorme. “Entretien Avec John Coltrane.” Les Cahiers
du Jazz 8 (1963): 1-14.
Cole, Bill. John Coltrane. New York: Schirmer Books, 1976.
Coltrane, Alice. Journey in Satchidananda. Recorded November 8, 1970. LP.
———.	Personal	Interview.	Woodland	Hills,	CA.	May	2001.	Tape	and	transcript	
in author’s possession.
———.	Universal Consciousness. Impulse. 1971. LP.
Cox, Harvey. Turning East: The Promise and Peril of the New Orientalism. New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1977.
Dean, Roger. New Structures in Jazz and Improvised Music since 1960. Philadelphia:
Open University Press, 1992.
Dews, Angela. “Alice Coltrane.” Essence. December 1971, 42-43.
The	Divine	Life	Society	Website,	www.divinelifesociety.org.	Accessed	August	
2007.
Du	Bois,	W.	E.	B.	“Radical	India.”	People, January 1929. Reprinted in The Correspondence
of W. E. B. Du Bois. Vol. 1, Selections 1877–1934. Ed. Herbert 
Aptheker, 386. Amherst: University of Massachusetts, 1973.
Eck, Diana, ed. Eastern Spirituality in America. New York: Paulist Press, 
1987.
———.	Encountering God: A Spiritual Journey from Bozeman to Banaras. 
Boston: Beacon Press, 1993.
Ellwood, Robert S. Alternative Altars: Unconventional and Eastern Spirituality 
in America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979.
———.	The Sixties Spiritual Awakening: American Religion Moving from Modern
to Postmodern. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1994.
 60  Franya Berkman
Emerson,	Ralph	Waldo.	The Best of Ralph Waldo Emerson: Essays, Poems, Addresses.
Ed.	Gordon	Sherman	Haight.	New	York:	Classics	Club,	1941.
Farrell,	Gerry.	Indian Music and the West. Oxford: Clarendon, 1997.
Feather, Leonard. The Encyclopedia of Jazz in the Sixties. New York: Da Capo, 
1986.
Fichter, Joseph H. “American Religion and the Negro.” Daedalus. Fall (1965): 
1987.
Fraim, John. Spirit Catcher: The Life and Art of John Coltrane.	West	Liberty,	
OH:	Great	House	Co.,	1996.
Frazier, Franklin. The Negro Church in America. New York: Schocken Books, 
1964.
Gates,	Henry	Louis	Jr.,	ed.	Bearing Witness: Selections from African-American 
Autobiography in the Twentieth Century. New York: Pantheon Books, 
1991.
Gilroy,	Paul.	Against Race: Imagining Political Culture Beyond the Color Line. 
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2000.
Hall, James C. Mercy, Mercy, Me: African American Culture and the American 
Sixties. New York: Oxford, 2001.
Harding, Vincent. “The Religion of Black Power.” The Religious Situation. Ed. 
Donald R. Cutler. Boston: Beacon Press, 1968. 31.
Hentoff, Nat. Liner notes to Live at the Village Vanguard by John Coltrane. 
Impulse 10. 1961. LP.
Hersch,	Charles.	“‘Let	Freedom	Ring’:	Free	Jazz	and	African-American	Politics.”	
Cultural Critique	Winter	(1996):	98-123.
Jameson, Frederic. “Periodizing the Sixties.” The Sixties Without Apology. 
Eds. Sonya Sayres, et al. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 1984. 
178-209. 
Jenkins, Philip. Mystics and Messiahs: Cults and New Religions in American 
History. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Jost, Ekkehard. Free-Jazz. New York: Da Capo, 1974.
Kelley,	Robin	D.	G.	Freedom Dreams: The Black Radical Imagination. Boston: 
Beacon Press, 2002.
Kiroff, Matthew J. “Caseworks: As Performed by Cecil Taylor and the Art Ensemble
of Chicago: A Musical Analysis and Sociopolitical History.” PhD 
diss., Cornell, 1997.
Kofsky, Frank. John Coltrane and the Jazz Revolution of the 1960s. 1970. Reprint, 
New	York:	Pathfinder,	1998.
Levine, Lawrence. Black Culture and Black Consciousness. New York: Oxford, 
1977.
Litweiler, John. The Freedom Principal: Jazz after 1958. New York: Quill, 
1993.
Lopez, Donald S., ed. Curators of the Buddha: The Study of Buddhism under 
Colonialism. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1995.
 Appropriating Universality  61
Marx,	Gary	T.	“Religion:	Opiate	or	Inspiration	of	Civil	Rights	Militancy.”	The 
Black Church in America. Eds. Hart M. Nelsen, Raytha L.Yokley, and Anne 
K. Nelsen. New York: Basic Books, 1967. 
Maultsby,	Portia	K.	“The	Impact	of	Gospel	Music	on	the	Secular	Music	Industry.”	
Signifyin(g), Sanctifyin, & Slam Dunking.	Ed.	Gena	Dagel	Caponi.	Amherst:	
University of Massachusetts Press, 1992. 
McAlister, Melani. Epic Encounters: Culture, Media, and U.S. Interest in The 
Middle East, 1945–2000. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001.
———.	“One	Black	Allah:	The	Middle	East	in	the	Cultural	Politics	of	African	
American Liberation, 1955–1970.” American Quarterly 51.3 (1999): 622656.
Monson,	Ingrid.	“Oh	Freedom:	George	Russell,	John	Coltrane	and	Modal	Jazz.” 
In the Course of Performance: Studies in the World of Musical Improvisation. 
Ed. Bruno Nettl. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998. 
Murray, Albert. Stomping the Blues.	New	York:	McGraw-Hill,	1973.
Neal, Larry. Visions of a Liberated Future: Black Arts Movement Writings. New 
York: Thunder’s Mouth Press, 1989.
Niebuhr, H. Richard. The Social Sources of Denominationalism. New York: Holt 
and Company, 1929.
Nisenson, Eric. Ascension: John Coltrane and His Quest. New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, 1993.
Palumbo-Liu, David. “Universalisms and Minority Discourse.” Differences: A 
Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies 7.1 (1995): 188-208.
Pike, Sarah. New Age and Neopagan Religions. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2004.
Porter, Lewis. John Coltrane: His Life and Music. Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press, 1998.
Prashad, Vijay. The Karma of Brown Folk. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 2000.
Priestley, Brian. John Coltrane. London: Apollo, 1987.
Robins, Thomas, and Dick Anthony, eds. In Gods We Trust: New Patterns of 
Religious Pluralism in America. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books, 
1981. 
Roof,	Wade	Clark.	Spiritual Marketplace: Baby Boomers and the Remaking of 
American Religion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999.
———,	Jackson	W.	Carroll,	and	David	A.	Roozen,	eds.	The Post-War Generation
and Establishment Religion: Cross Cultural Perspectives. Boulder, CO: 
Westview	Press,	1995.
Rowland, Steve, producer. Tell Me How Long Trane’s Been Gone.	Written	by	
Larry Abrams. Narrated by Michael S. Harper. Radio Documentary. [Chicago]:
WFMT	Fine	Arts	Network,	2001.	5	compact	discs.
Said, Edward. Orientalism. New York: Vintage Books, 1979.
Sidran, Ben. Black Talk.	New	York:	Holt,	Rinehart	and	Winston,	1971.
 62  Franya Berkman
Such, David. Avante-Garde Musicians: Performing “Out There.” Iowa City: 
University of Iowa Press, 1993.
Szwed, John. Space Is the Place: The Lives and Times of Sun Ra. New York: 
Pantheon Books, 1997.
Taylor, Charles. The Ethics of Authenticity. Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press, 1991.
Thomas, J. C. Chasin’ the Trane: The Music and Mystique of John Coltrane. 
Garden	City,	NY:	Doubleday,	1975.
Thurman, Howard. With Head and Heart: The Autobiography of Howard Thurman.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1979.
Tipton, Steven M. Getting Saved from the Sixties. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1981.
Toop, David. “Alice Coltrane: Universal Consciousness.” Wire 221 (2002): 
37-44.
Turner, Richard Brent. Islam in the African American Experience. Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1997.
Tynan, Josh. “India’s Master Musician.” Downbeat, May 6, 1965, 14-16.
Washington,	Joseph	R.	Jr.	Black Religion. Boston: Beacon, 1964.
Weinstein,	Norman	C.	A Night in Tunisia: Imaginings of Africa in Jazz. Metuchen, 
NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1922.
Wilmore,	Gayraud	S.	Black Religion and Black Radicalism: An Interpretation of 
the Religious History of African Americans. 3rd ed. 1973. Reprint, Maryknoll,
NY: Orbis Books, 1998.
Wuthnow,	Robert.	After Heaven: Spirituality in America since the 1950s. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1998.
———.	Experimentation in American Religion. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1978.
———.	The Restructuring of American Religion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1988.
