EDITORIALS Break Away from Regularity There can be no question that there is an immense gain in breaking away from regu- larity in school work whenever opportunity arises. An admirable occasion is offered in the study of the lives of candidates for the Hall of Fame in New York University. Here are the names of twenty-seven persons of whom twelve were chosen in October for places in the New York University Hall of Fame : - Samuel Adams, Edwin Booth, Horace Bush- nell, George Rogers Clark, John Singleton Copley, Dorothea Lynde Dix, William Lloyd Garrison, John Jay, Adoniram Judson, William Penn, John Paul Jones, Nathaniel Greene, General Thomas Jonathan u Stonewall " Jack- son, General Philip Henry Sheridan, Matthew Fontaine Maury, Benjamin Thompson (Count Rumford), Wendell Phillips, Henry Hobson Richardson, Benjamin Rush, Noah Webster, Walt Whitman, Henry David Thoreau, Charles Bulfinch, Cyrus West Field, Sidney Lanier, Paul Revere and James Otis. It would be well worth while for every Junior and Senior High School student to write the main points in the lives of these twenty-seven persons which entitle them to such prominence. After these biographical sketches have been written and read to the school there might be a vote of the leading twelve. Home for Retired Teachers Strike while the iron is hot! There is no other equally important profes- sional need comparable to that of backing Miss Olive M. Jones and her committee of the National Education Association in pro- viding homes for retired teachers. Chicago is joining the cities to insist that all teachers retire at the age of seventy. This requirement will soon be universal. There is a determined purpose to reduce the retirement age to sixty-five and an unan- nounced purpose to reduce it to sixty. One of the great forces promoting insistence upon such retirement is the professional propaganda for preparation which no teachers could have had when a teacher of seventy years of age entered the profession, and the increased re- quirements will soon be beyond any attain- ments possible when a teacher of sixty-five and later of sixty entered the profession. Com- paratively few of even the best teachers had the education fifty or even forty years ago which will allow them to study for credits in a present-day university. Another force that will increase rapidly* from now on is the over-supply of graduates* 644 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION December 31, 1925 of professional institutions, and to make places for these graduates the present teachers, re- gardless of capability, will be eliminated by lowering the age of forced retirement. The present salaries are very recent. Until within ten years nine-tenths of the teachers of the United States could not lay aside one hundred dollars a year, which would have yielded not more than six dollars a year in re- tirement. Comparatively few of the six hundred thou- sand teachers of the United States, will have a pension or a retirement income adequate for a. living such as they should have. A woman of seventy years of age has out- lived the relatives of her day, and practically npne of them has any home to which she "will be welcome, because she is liable to live from ten to fifteen years and distant relatives hesitate to take responsibility for the care of a man or woman from seventy to eighty years of age. We are intensely interested in the great undertaking of Miss Jones, because of several cases with which we are familiar. We recently secured a special pension of six hundred dollars a year for a teacher, a graduate with honor of a Massachusetts State Normal School, but there is no place where she can live on six hundred dollars a year as she should live. A teacher in a Massachusetts State Normal School, an exceptionally able and beloved teacher, is in a " city home " with no comrade- ship such as should be hers. We have recently been interested in trying to make a man of eighty reconciled to go to an exceptionally fine " city home," but he would rather die than go to a " city home." Let us all get busy. Let us do something, and do it at once. At least write Miss Jones, 310 West Ninety-seventh Street, New York City, that you are interested in her noble mis- sion. Religious Education in Kansas We are using in this issue an interesting article by W. S. Heusner, on " Week-Day Re- ligious Education in Salina, Kansas." Ninety-four per cent, of all the children en- rolled in the public schools of that city attend regularly the Week-Day Religious Education classes. Since the introduction of this work in Salina the plan has been so widely adopted in the state that thirty-six urban communities are experimenting on this plan with a total en- rollment of 28,316 pupils. Lexington and Cassidy Lexington, Kentucky, continues to hold her place in the front rank educationally, carrying a bond issue of $400,000 for a new school plant by a vote of five to one, and as a noble com- panion piece to that re-elected Superintendent M. A. Cassidy for four years and increased his salary. No city, North or South, demonstrates more poise than does the metropolis of the Blue Grass country, having given Mr. Cassidy a free hand in educational progress for many years. He is a genius, creating functionings new and fascinating and a master in realizing ideals. Achievements of Teachers College The annual report of Dean James E. Russell of leachers College, Columbia University, is the most remarkable professional announce- ment ever made in America. It eliminates all professional rivals in the world. A few state- ments are adequate to justify this non-superla- tive statement. There is an annual budget for maintenance of more than $3,000,000! In the last year it was $3,035,781 ! The enrollment was nine thousand two hun- dred and four (9,204) professional students from four hundred and fifty (450) different colleges and other teacher-training institutions, repre- senting every state in the Union, while foreign lands sent to Teachers College three hundred and eight (308) professional students from fifty- five (55) different countries. More than half a million dollars was spent on practical professional and child welfare re- search ! These merely suggest the vast amount of maintenance resources, and the boundless pro- fessional influence on every continent, in almost every city of the New World, and in every country of the Old World. Department of Superintendence, Washington,. D.C., February 21-25. Major Clancy A. W. Clancy, who died in Minneapolis on Christmas Day, was an unusual personality who attached to himself the widest range of intense friendships. The telegraphic announce- ment of his death, mingled with the echoes of the most universally joyous Christmas we have known, recalled first of all Mr. Clancy's devo- tion to the church. For half a century it was his custom on the Sunday of the summer and winter meetings of the National Education As- sociation, Bible under his arm, to gather a few friends and attend some Methodist Church morning service, always remaining for the Sunday School. When the meeting was in Boston in 1910 arrangements had been made for Mr. Crabtree and myself to speak at the State Prison in Charlestown. As we started from Hotel Bruns- wick Mr. Clancy appeared, Bible under his arm, to gather his friends for the First Methodist Church, but Mr. Crabtree and I took him with us. The prisoners were all in place, and we made appropriate talks, rather stilted and not much appreciated. Then the chaplain said:- " Will your friend speak ? ? and such a thrilling address I have rarely heard. That audience was keenly alive as soon as he began, and they- December 31, 1925 JOURNAL OP EDUCATION 645 laughed and cried, and when he stopped they cheered like football enthusiasts. It was in no sense an appeal to the " bleachers," but a real genuine Methodist revivalistic appeal. From that day with me Major Clancy always had that picture as the background of everything he did. Several years ago he began to have Sunday morning breakfasts at both the summer and winter meetings of the Association. In Cincin- nati last winter his breakfast was really won- derful. It cannot be described. There .was something quite sacred in the way everyone - some thirty persons - spoke. The Major wanted it to be a religious setting in which singing gospel hymns and patriotic songs played a large part. Dr. Homer H. Seerley and Dr. O. T. Corson were especially tender in their tributes to the host. No one would have been surprised had that been Major Clancy's last appearance. We missed the Indianapolis breakfast, but we received in San Francisco a characteristic tele- gram from him that Sunday. We never saw him again, though we had frequent letters, always passing on a message regarding some friend whom he had seen or from whom he had heard. That address to the prisoners in Charlestown and that Cincinnati breakfast are a composite picture of a friend of more than half a century. We close this tribute with some lines with which the Cincinnati breakfast closed: - "I did not know God loved me in so sweet a way before, 'Tis He alone who can such blessing send, And when His love would new expression find, He sent thee to me and He said:- 'Behold a Friend.' " Alexander of Virginia Fred M. Alexander, of Newport News, president of the Virginia State Teachers 'Asso- ciation, 1925, has made an heroic effort to arouse the teachers of the state from top to bottom to a sense of their responsibility to the profession, to the children and to the state. His devotion to the cause was unprecedented for Virginia, since he traveled four thousand miles, addressed eight of the nine district meet- ings, attended by four thousand, four hundred and fifty teachers. The legislative program thát he recommended was as follows: - That the compulsory education law be so amended as to include all children between the ages of seven and sixteen, and that there be a state-wide enforcement of the law. That we urge the passage of a Teachers' Tenure Law. That we favor a referendum giving the peo- ple an opportunity to vote on an amendment that will pave the way for providing capital outlay for the advancement of higher educa- tion in Virginia. That the legislative committee investigate possible sources of additional school revenue such as a tax on luxuries and a tax on minerals. An appropriation for elementary schools of $6,500,000 on the basis that the salaries of ele- mentary school teachers be paid one-half by state funds and one-half from local funds; thé appropriation by the state would be (figures to be supplied fall of 1925). This seems a fair division of the heaviest item in the educational budget. Increase in the high school fund from $200,000 to $400,000. The amount appropriated to each high school on the present basis is pitiably small. Under the law the 10 cent táx and 4 cent tax must be used exclusively for grades one to seven inclusive. The rçsult is that secondary education is almost exclusively à charge against local school funds. The appro- priation from the state ought to be very materially increased in order that the state tax may share some appreciable part of the cost of secondary education. An equalized fund of $500;000. President Alexander's program will put his state in the front rank if the teachers rally to his clarion professional call. There is no likelihood that college women in the United States will ever take smoking seri- ously even if a few women in a few colleges smoke. Christmas Greetings This year above all others has had Christmas cheer in the air and in the mail. The mes- sages have been the sweetest and their setting the most beautiful. - This is certainly true of those which have come to us. We have wished >ve might use many of them in the Journal of education, for they have been really wonder- fully appreciative. One is so expressive of what we wish were true, and its expression is so unusual, that we take the risk of publishing Dear Dr. Winship: You are the shrewdest man I know. You have gone about for many years, gathering unto your- self The only treasure that can't be wiped out by a bank failure. That keeps, without' mildewing. That grows fresher year by year. That pyramids in value all the time. That can be accumulated to excess without depriving somebody else. That can be taken along everywhere you go and that bobs up every time you go down the street - at least a half-dozen times and says: "Here I am, coming right along with you, safe and sound!" The only riches that will go through the. needle's eye- because the folks you got it from have each been enriched by giving it. What's more- you've got more of it than anybody else I know and you've had everybody falling over himself to give it to you ! Here's "Merry Christmas and Happy Ñew Year" from one of the proud shareholders ill your billion-dollar friendship corporation. Sincerely. Worth McClure.