248 Vitaly F. Konzhukov Fossato, F. and A. Kachkaeva (August 1999). “Russian Media Empires V.” Found at http://www.- rferl.org/nca/special/rumedia5/index.html. Horvat, J. (1991). “The East European Journalist,” pp. 191-200 in Journal of International Affairs, Vol. 45. Kommersant, No. 44 (1991). “Borovoy Nakonets-to Otsenil Televidenie. A Kupit ne Smog” (Borovoy Has Finally Started to Value Television. But He Cannot Buy It), p. 11. New York Times (October 15, 1993). “Permanent Ban for 13 Russian Newspapers,” p. A7. Nezavisimaya Gazeta (February 22, 1992). “O Dopolnitel’nyh Merah Po Pravovomu I Ekonomi- cheskomu Obespecheniu Periodicheskih Izdaniy I Gosudarstvennogo Knigoizdania” (About Additional Measures for Legal and Economic Defense of Periodical Press and State Book Publishing), p. 1. Rhodes, M. (1993a). “The Newspaper in Russia Today,” pp. 39-42 in RFE/RL Research Report, Vol. 2, No. 45. Part 4 Rhodes, M. (1993b). “Russians and Television,” pp. 54-56 in RFE/RL Research Report, Vol. 2, No. 39. Critiques of the Emerging Virtual/Media World Tolz, V. (1993). “The Media in the Countries of the Former Soviet Union,” pp. 1-5 in RFE/RL Research Report, Vol. 2, No. 27. Vachnadze, G. (1992). Secrets of Journalism in Russia. Commack, NY: Nova Science Publishers. Valery, R. (November 17, 1992). “Uchenyi, ‘Prodavshiy Rodinu,’ Nakonets Poluchil Advodata” (Scientist Who “Sold Out the Motherland” Finally Gets a Defense Lawyer), p. 2 in Izvestia. Wilson, L. (1995). “Communication and Russia: Evolving Media in a Changing Society,” pp. 109-119 in The Social Science Journal, Vol. 32, No. 1. Wishnevsky, J. (1994). “The Role of the Media in the Parliamentary Election Campaign,” pp. 8- 12 in RFE/RL Research Report, Vol. 2, No. 46. Yasmann, V. (1993). “Where Has the KGB Gone?,” pp. 17-20 in RFE/RL Research Report, Vol. 2, No. 8.  Chapter 13 Media and Terrorists Russell F. Farnen Professor (Emeritus) of Political Science, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut, USA Abstract The public role of the mass media in most Western industrialized societies is (in addition to making a profit) to inform and educate citizens in the ways of democracy. By contrast, the goal of organized terrorists groups is to upset these orderly processes and to achieve private usually unpopular, political and informational goals. Along the way, these violent groups use and abuse the media and the state. Thy, in turn, are reciprocally used and abused in the process. Both terrorism’s and media’s roles, techniques, and expectations are explained and the media-terrorist interactive system described. A case study of the Italian Red Brigades’ (Brigate Rosse or BR) 1978 kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro is presented for illustrative purposes. Some conclusions and suggestions for changing the cycle-of-violence system through media, governmental, diplomatic, and rhetorical reforms are also offered for consideration in the context of future public/media policymaking and publicizing terrorism for informational, rather than exploitative, purposes. Introduction In addition to making a profit, the public role of the mass media in most Western industrialized societies is to inform and educate citizens in the ways of democracy. By contrast, the goal of organized terrorist groups is to upset these orderly processes and to achieve private, usually unpopular, political and informational goals. Along the way, these violent groups use and abuse the media and the state, and they are reciprocally used and abused. Media become witting and unwitting winners and losers in this process, which shares elements of both a game and a drama. In order to perform their controlling and socially reinforcing role in the communications processes, media must regularly capture the public’s attention (i.e., they must force the public to digest important news and consumer infor- mation). Therefore, media seduce consumers with sports, comics, human-interest stories, crime, scare headlines, and enticingly violent leads. Although Accuracy in the Media, The Moral Majority, Conservative Digest, Media Monitor, and the New Right Report regularly attack the alleged liberalism of the three major networks, the Public Broadcasting System (PBS), National Public Radio (NPR), and major newspapers (e.g., the Washington Post and the New York Times), this so-called liberal slant is illusory. NPR may be unique in more severely criticizing Republican rather than Democratic presidents from 1974 to 1983, but most major newspapers and all of the networks are more noteworthy for their uniform criticism of all presidents, regardless of party stripe, their quest of middle- 252 Russell F. Farnen of-the-road positions on partisan political questions, and their avoidance of entanglement in current public policy disputes (Larson, Spring 1989). The mass media in America are mainstream in ideology and strongly establishment-oriented, as are other large American corporations. For example, during the conservative resurgence from 1972 to 1984, between 42% and 71% of the major American newspapers (which controlled between 49% and 77% of total newspaper circulation) endorsed the more-conservative Republican presidential candidate. This is in contrast to the 5-12% that endorsed the less-conservative Democratic presidential candidate and the 23-42% that remained uncommitted during this same 12-year period (Stanley and Niemi, 1988). Above all, media (using Ben Bagdikian’s term) employ the so-called twin sovereigns to get attention: sex and violence (Bagdikian, 1987). They stress murders, rapes, robberies, and other deviant, unusual, and “abnormal” events, each unique in its own way. Since the media have an unquenchable thirst for unsavory violence and “man bites dog” stories, militant groups find them easy targets for manipulation. But the reverse is also true. While television, newspapers, magazines, and radio could exist without as much violence in their daily diets, the products, appeal, and nature of the mass media would change and their effects would probably be minimized. Terrorism could not exist in its present form without a mass audience. Without widespread popular exposure, the very nature of the terrorist phenomenon would radically change. Indeed, what we know as terrorism is actually a media creation; mass media define, delimit, delegitimize, and discredit events that we have not actually seen, but that we all instantly recognize as terrorist acts. The influence of television, within its mass media setting, can be approached through a variety of theoretical constructs. These theories help to explain why people pay attention to and use new media. Harold Lasswell’s post-1945 model of the communications process maintained that the more personal the communication, the greater the effect. Therefore, personal communication is more effective than television, which (in turn) is more effective than film, radio, or print media. Klapper’s (1960, pp. 8, 55, 92-97) subsequent work recognized the fact that previous exposure to issues was a significant intervening variable. He also described selective information processing and the conversion process. Those media seeking to promote change had a direct effect, were reinforced positively, or were neutralized by other mediating factors, which produced change in different directions. Later, in the same decade, uses and gratification theory stressed the recipient of the messages and his/her selective exposure, which created cognitive dissonance or consonance in the communications process. In the 1970s, the “gatekeeping” and “agenda-setting” functions of the press were explored as was the “need for orientation” theory. The latter states that people must relate to their environments through issues; media are used to satisfy personal needs, thus influencing 252 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 253 of-the-road positions on partisan political questions, and their avoidance of individual agenda setting (Freedman and Sears, 1965). Along the way, the role of entanglement in current public policy disputes (Larson, Spring 1989). The mass personal interactions among opinion influencers or news elites and the two-step media in America are mainstream in ideology and strongly establishment-oriented, flow of communications also came into the literature. as are other large American corporations. For example, during the conservative The gatekeeping and agenda-setting functions of the media are most relevant to resurgence from 1972 to 1984, between 42% and 71% of the major American the subject of terrorist news. Knowledge and information, the media’s tools, are newspapers (which controlled between 49% and 77% of total newspaper used to ensure system maintenance through feedback and distribution control. In circulation) endorsed the more-conservative Republican presidential candidate. complex pluralistic and interdependent societies, the print and broadcast journalists This is in contrast to the 5-12% that endorsed the less-conservative Democratic serve as arbiters of conflict management. Journalists also perform watchdog or presidential candidate and the 23-42% that remained uncommitted during this same surveillance functions. These functions allow social stress or subsystem dys- 12-year period (Stanley and Niemi, 1988). functions to be resolved or handled without resort to civil strife and resultant social Above all, media (using Ben Bagdikian’s term) employ the so-called twin chaos. News broadcasts and stories serve to keep the flow of information moving sovereigns to get attention: sex and violence (Bagdikian, 1987). They stress so that tension and ultimate release (resolution) follow the very crisis that the media murders, rapes, robberies, and other deviant, unusual, and “abnormal” events, each and political spokespersons jointly created. The media provide discrete knowledge unique in its own way. Since the media have an unquenchable thirst for unsavory of an issue or event rather than in-depth knowledge about a controversy or public violence and “man bites dog” stories, militant groups find them easy targets for policy. Media often avoid the latter, since those dangerous topics may require manipulation. But the reverse is also true. While television, newspapers, delving into causes and proposed solutions, both of which may be extremely magazines, and radio could exist without as much violence in their daily diets, the divisive. Instead, the media selectively combine sights, sounds, images, and products, appeal, and nature of the mass media would change and their effects symbols into a meta-reality. These not only depict reality, but actually create, would probably be minimized. recreate, replace, or displace it. This media function is well documented in Terrorism could not exist in its present form without a mass audience. Without postmodern semiotic, humanistic, and cultural studies of the news genre (Graber, widespread popular exposure, the very nature of the terrorist phenomenon would 1980, pp. 117-154; Agee, et al, 1982, pp. 17-33, Robinson, 1984, pp. 199-221). radically change. Indeed, what we know as terrorism is actually a media creation; Of course, violent bombings, kidnappings, or robberies actually involve very mass media define, delimit, delegitimize, and discredit events that we have not few perpetrators and relatively few victims. Any small war or state military action, actually seen, but that we all instantly recognize as terrorist acts. such as the Grenada invasion or “police action” in Libya (which some label “state The influence of television, within its mass media setting, can be approached terrorism”), are far more elaborate in both the number of killers and killed, as are through a variety of theoretical constructs. These theories help to explain why the weekly totals of gun-related deaths or highway mayhem on American roads. So people pay attention to and use new media. Harold Lasswell’s post-1945 model of the relative scale of militant violence or the extent of public risk of physical injury the communications process maintained that the more personal the communication, is relatively small. In fact, the number of actual terrorist incidents was only 127 out the greater the effect. Therefore, personal communication is more effective than of 258 reports in the Los Angeles Times, Washington Post, and New York Times in television, which (in turn) is more effective than film, radio, or print media. the 1980-1985 period; that is, an average of about 25 per year (Picard and Adams, Klapper’s (1960, pp. 8, 55, 92-97) subsequent work recognized the fact that March 1988, p. 1). In the United States, a person is more likely to die as a victim of previous exposure to issues was a significant intervening variable. He also an asthma attack than as a victim of a terrorist attack. described selective information processing and the conversion process. Those If we examine the statistics from a conflicting perspective, we see the number media seeking to promote change had a direct effect, were reinforced positively, or of international terrorist incidents reported in 1985 was 812 (a 36% increase over were neutralized by other mediating factors, which produced change in different 1984), with 177 involving US targets. Domestically, there were only seven actual directions. incidents that same year (with 23 thwarted attempts, according to FBI reports). Of Later, in the same decade, uses and gratification theory stressed the recipient of course, certain highly visible incidents caught media and the public attention. the messages and his/her selective exposure, which created cognitive dissonance or Among these were the TWA 847, Achille Lauro, and Rome and Vienna airport consonance in the communications process. In the 1970s, the “gatekeeping” and assaults in which American nationals were also victimized (Picard and Adams, “agenda-setting” functions of the press were explored as was the “need for March 1988). Despite relatively small numbers, what we remember is the residue orientation” theory. The latter states that people must relate to their environments of psychological threats, diminution of national pride, and challenges to sacred through issues; media are used to satisfy personal needs, thus influencing morals, precious symbols, and hallowed myths. These have longer lasting and more 254 Russell F. Farnen qualitative significance to the citizenry and its leaders. This is why the most proficient terrorists seek to strike at the heart of the state and the core of the establishment; they aim to destroy those elements that represent the highest symbolic and media values: American tourists, flagship carriers, embassies, or military personnel. As with studies of crime, mugging, alcoholism, and other social ills, statistics are used to buttress the rationality of this phenomenon, which, as a UMI publication and Yonah Alexander say, “affects every person in the global community and inspires fear in many” (UMI Research Collections Information Service, 1989). Ambassador at Large for Counter-Terrorism L. Paul Bremer’s (March 1987, pp. 1-4) official US definition of terrorism allows his assertion that there were 600 such incidents in 1984; 780 in 1985; 800 in 1986; and 2000 so- called casualties in 1987. Other statistics from the RAND Corporation in 1987 claim that anti-US terrorism peaked in 1977 with 99 cases. In 194, there were 68 cases; in 1985, 27; and in 1986, only 11. In the latter year, the US share was only 3% of the 400 deaths attributable to international terrorism as a whole (Dobkin, November 1989, p. 17). By defining terrorism, any administration can control and own the problem itself, particularly if the media repeat the unquestioned assertions and afford them legitimacy as larger-than-life social drama with a huge public audience. Although terrorism is more dramatic than everyday crime news, both serve a moral, socially solidifying, and ideological function. In addition to accepting administration labels, the media help to brand terrorism as a foreign, strange, and evil occurrence – an abnormality that has no social context and that is irrational by Western standards. As Said (1988, pp. 149-158) says, the “wall-to-wall nonsense about terrorism can inflict grave damage . . . because it consolidates the immense, unrestrained, pseudo- patriotic narcissism we are nourishing.” This obsession with terrorism has not only led to irresponsible acts, but, as Secretary of State George Shultz said in 1985, has also bordered on considering a declaration of war against Libya. The deliberately concocted scenarios of mortal danger and threat to America’s vital national interests are responsible for popular approval of warlike acts and repressive measures such as the air raid on Libya in 1986. The buildup of tension after the administration’s erroneous attribution to Libya of responsibility for the Berlin disco bombing inevitably led to the bombing of Tripoli. With the international state system no longer under the hegemonic control of either Western or Eastern powers, counterterrorism efforts are directed at restoring international principles of legitimacy and order. The popular panic engendered by media and administration rhetoric is used not only to justify a deadly answering force, but also to quash forever any hope of ascertaining if a legitimate basis for the terrorist grievance exists (Bruck, Winter 1989). The misuse of the terrorist threat also allows an administration based on “peace through strength” and a $3 trillion military buildup to rationalize the use of weaponry so that Americans can once 254 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 255 qualitative significance to the citizenry and its leaders. This is why the most again “stand tall” regardless of its effect on the longer range issues of world order proficient terrorists seek to strike at the heart of the state and the core of the and a lasting peace. As Der Derian says of the “national security culture” in the establishment; they aim to destroy those elements that represent the highest United States: symbolic and media values: American tourists, flagship carriers, embassies, or military personnel. Much of what we do know of terrorism displays a superficiality of reasoning and a As with studies of crime, mugging, alcoholism, and other social ills, statistics corruption of language which effects truths about terrorism without any sense of how these truths are produced by and help to sustain official discourses of international are used to buttress the rationality of this phenomenon, which, as a UMI relations (Der Derian, 1989, p. 234). publication and Yonah Alexander say, “affects every person in the global community and inspires fear in many” (UMI Research Collections Information Obviously, there is more at stake here than normally meets the popular or Service, 1989). Ambassador at Large for Counter-Terrorism L. Paul Bremer’s journalistic eye (Palmerton, 1988; Dobkin, November 1989; Bruck, Winter 1989). (March 1987, pp. 1-4) official US definition of terrorism allows his assertion that Bruck’s review of critical theory, ideological closure, and hegemonic analysis of there were 600 such incidents in 1984; 780 in 1985; 800 in 1986; and 2000 so- the communications media (e.g., Todd Gitlin, 1980, pp. 25-26, 284) indicates that called casualties in 1987. Other statistics from the RAND Corporation in 1987 there may be hope for a revised journalistic perspective on terrorism reporting and claim that anti-US terrorism peaked in 1977 with 99 cases. In 194, there were 68 coverage, as has happened in recent years with the peace movement. As he said: cases; in 1985, 27; and in 1986, only 11. In the latter year, the US share was only 3% of the 400 deaths attributable to international terrorism as a whole (Dobkin, Against a depiction of the media as a relatively seamlessly reproducing apparatus consistently serving the entrenched powers, I want to argue that the media show November 1989, p. 17). discursive openings, inconsistencies, and contradictions. They can provide the basis for By defining terrorism, any administration can control and own the problem developing strategic politics by alternative groups and movements (Bruck, Winter 1989, itself, particularly if the media repeat the unquestioned assertions and afford them p. 113). legitimacy as larger-than-life social drama with a huge public audience. Although terrorism is more dramatic than everyday crime news, both serve a moral, socially Although his study is based on a Canadian daily newspaper’s coverage of solidifying, and ideological function. In addition to accepting administration labels, peace, disarmament and security issues, Bruck’s discussion of media systems is the media help to brand terrorism as a foreign, strange, and evil occurrence – an equally applicable to the United States. Consequently, there is some room for abnormality that has no social context and that is irrational by Western standards. optimism about breaking down the terrorist act/media response/government As Said (1988, pp. 149-158) says, the “wall-to-wall nonsense about terrorism can definition/popular panic nexus in such violent international dramatic events. inflict grave damage . . . because it consolidates the immense, unrestrained, pseudo- The interactions between mass media and violent terrorism are akin to host patriotic narcissism we are nourishing.” This obsession with terrorism has not only (media) and parasite (violent terrorism). This symbiotic relationship requires the led to irresponsible acts, but, as Secretary of State George Shultz said in 1985, has media to use violence to sell magazines or newspapers and gain viewers and also bordered on considering a declaration of war against Libya. The deliberately listeners. They seek to increase their readership and audience share to sell billions concocted scenarios of mortal danger and threat to America’s vital national of dollars of advertising. This increases everyone’s profitability, with the possible interests are responsible for popular approval of warlike acts and repressive exception of the terrorists. In Eastern or Western state-controlled mass media measures such as the air raid on Libya in 1986. The buildup of tension after the societies (whose numbers in the West decrease daily), publicly owned media administration’s erroneous attribution to Libya of responsibility for the Berlin disco regularly give high visibility to terrorist violence. Why? Because the news canon bombing inevitably led to the bombing of Tripoli. requires them to report all major events to ensure their continued legitimacy and With the international state system no longer under the hegemonic control of credibility as a truthful or free press. With numerous and increasing external either Western or Eastern powers, counterterrorism efforts are directed at restoring sources of news via satellite and radio, any international news event spreads like international principles of legitimacy and order. The popular panic engendered by wildfire through technological societies. This occurs even without benefit of media and administration rhetoric is used not only to justify a deadly answering normal media contexts despite the state’s mechanisms for communications control. force, but also to quash forever any hope of ascertaining if a legitimate basis for the Even the Eastern socialist press covered terrorist events in order to maintain terrorist grievance exists (Bruck, Winter 1989). The misuse of the terrorist threat credibility as to benefit from invidious comparisons between the “wild West” and also allows an administration based on “peace through strength” and a $3 trillion the “orderly East,” where peace and quiet reign supreme. military buildup to rationalize the use of weaponry so that Americans can once 256 Russell F. Farnen This situation highlights the need to examine a series of interrelationships between the media and terrorism. Among others, two of the most interesting questions are:  Do the media actually help or hinder terrorism despite their societal role as cheerleader in support of basic antiviolent norms? (This is the contagion or epidemic theory regarding the spread of the terrorist virus or infection.)  Do media/publicity-starved terrorist groups not only recognize this media dependence on violence, but also structure their campaigns to insure maximum media coverage and involvement for their own purposes? In the process of answering these two queries, both terrorism’s and media’s roles, techniques, and expectations will be explained and the media/terrorist interactive system will be described. A case study of the Italian Red Brigade’s (Brigate Rosse or BR) 1978 kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro is presented for illustrative purposes. Some conclusions and suggestions for changing the cycle of violence system are also offered for consideration in the context of future pub- lic/media policymaking. Common Roles, Expectations, Techniques: Mass Media and Terrorism A description of the unique and common roles of mass media and terrorism as international phenomena may help to show that these seemingly disparate transnational entities have certain mutually reinforcing qualities. Each is, therefore, the captive or the victim, the friend or the foe, of the other. However, role reversals are not unusual during the course of terrorist incidents. International Terrorism Defined and Described The terrorist is considered the “ultimate criminal.” With the sudden demise of post- Gorbachev communism as the main enemy, terrorism has become “public enemy number one” in American public discourse (Said, 1988, p. 149). Both the media and the political establishment share responsibility for so framing and defining in domestic terms this mainly international problem. Therefore, it has high salience value in the public’s mind. The power to name, label, and define terrorism is especially relevant to this discussion since terrorism is so distant and beyond the average person’s experience. It is a case (as in much international discourse) where the media wield exceptional power over popular conceptions of reality. The media usually accept the official or institutionalized definitions of abstract, foreign, or new events. This is especially true when there is an established party line in the government regarding abstruse or unfamiliar events. 256 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 257 This situation highlights the need to examine a series of interrelationships Although there was some difference in the Reagan administration’s earlier between the media and terrorism. Among others, two of the most interesting definitions of terrorism, a clear party line emerged by 1984. In 1983, a US Army questions are: journal defined the international targets of terrorism as a case where  Do the media actually help or hinder terrorism despite their societal role as The calculated use of violence or the threat of violence to attain goals political, cheerleader in support of basic antiviolent norms? (This is the contagion or religious, or ideological in nature . . . done through intimidation, coercion, and involving epidemic theory regarding the spread of the terrorist virus or infection.) fear . . . it involves a criminal act that is often symbolic in nature and intended to influ-  Do media/publicity-starved terrorist groups not only recognize this media ence an audience beyond the immediate victim (Dobkin, November 1989, p. 15). dependence on violence, but also structure their campaigns to insure maximum media coverage and involvement for their own purposes? The next year, a State Department definition called it “premeditated, politically motivated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets by subnational groups In the process of answering these two queries, both terrorism’s and media’s or clandestine state agents (Dobkin, November 1989, p. 15). The US Ambassador roles, techniques, and expectations will be explained and the media/terrorist at Large for Counter-Terrorism, L. Paul Bremer (March 1987, p. 1), added to the interactive system will be described. A case study of the Italian Red Brigade’s official definition in 1987, when he said, “Terrorism’s most significant char- (Brigate Rosse or BR) 1978 kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro is presented for acteristic is that it despises and seeks to destroy the fundamentals of Western illustrative purposes. Some conclusions and suggestions for changing the cycle of democracy – respect for individual life and the rule of law.” That same year, John violence system are also offered for consideration in the context of future pub- Whitehead, a deputy secretary of state, said that terrorism is the new enemy for it is lic/media policymaking. no longer “the random, senseless act of a few crazed individuals” but is now “a new pattern of low-technology and an inexpensive warfare” and “a strategy and a Common Roles, Expectations, Techniques: Mass Media and tool of those who reject the norms and values of civilized people everywhere” Terrorism (Dobkin, November 1989, p. 16). Yonah Alexander (an academic spokesman close to the Reagan and Bush administrations’ vies) is directing a University of Michigan A description of the unique and common roles of mass media and terrorism as (UMI) international resource file on terrorism and has edited this journal for the last international phenomena may help to show that these seemingly disparate decade. The UMI view on modern terrorism is summed up in the following way: transnational entities have certain mutually reinforcing qualities. Each is, therefore, the captive or the victim, the friend or the foe, of the other. However, role reversals Modern-day terrorism is a challenge to every society. It is an issue which somehow are not unusual during the course of terrorist incidents. affects every person in the global community and inspires fear in many. Through the increased use of victimization, psychological warfare and munitions technology, International Terrorism Defined and Described terrorists have ushered in a New Age Terrorism sometimes termed “Low Intensity Conflict” – a new form of warfare in which soldiers are indistinguishable from civilians. The terrorist is considered the “ultimate criminal.” With the sudden demise of post- Yet, some say “one man’s terrorist is another man’s freedom-fighter.” The terrorist may be viewed as a criminal by some and heroic by others. Politics, propaganda and Gorbachev communism as the main enemy, terrorism has become “public enemy patriotism cloud the issue, and the public remains confused or overwhelmed. Experts number one” in American public discourse (Said, 1988, p. 149). Both the media debate on the most effective means to eliminate the ever-present danger of terrorist and the political establishment share responsibility for so framing and defining in incidents. It is a controversial subject – one not yet fully understood – and the questions domestic terms this mainly international problem. Therefore, it has high salience and concerns surrounding the topic have fueled an enormous amount of documentation value in the public’s mind. The power to name, label, and define terrorism is and scholarly research in the past twenty-five years (UMI, 1989, p. 2). especially relevant to this discussion since terrorism is so distant and beyond the Whole nations can be held hostage. A small band of unified and dedicated, average person’s experience. It is a case (as in much international discourse) where seemingly irrational, instantly important, and ultimately threatening men and the media wield exceptional power over popular conceptions of reality. The media women (usually young) may, supposedly, do violence to us all. Terrorists, though usually accept the official or institutionalized definitions of abstract, foreign, or relatively impotent, recognize these fears. Consequently, they plan and control the new events. This is especially true when there is an established party line in the calculated use of violence, mayhem, and death. Their aim is to provoke and inspire government regarding abstruse or unfamiliar events. extreme fear and dread among individuals, groups, nations, and international agencies and institutions. 258 Russell F. Farnen During the 1980s, we had the dubious advantage of more than 100 opperative definitions of terrorism. One expert on the subject, Martha Crenshaw (1987, pp. 4- 8), defines terrorism as “a strategy any political actor can use.” She also says that it requires few resources (i.e., it is cheap); it involves “violent coercion” in order “to intimidate an opponent”; and “it is intended to compel a change in an enemy’s behavior by affecting his will, not to destroy the enemy physically” (Crenshaw, 1987). Terrorism also relies on suspense and “psychological reactions of shock, outrage, and sometimes, enthusiasm” (Crenshaw, 1987). Moreover, terrorism usually occurs in times of peace rather than war. Noncombatants are the usual objects; the targets or victims have symbolic value, being representatives of a class, nation, or a cause. Crenshaw concludes: “Terrorism is fundamentally a strategy of demoralization, directed against the entire population of a nation rather than its armed forces, as would be the case in traditional warfare” (Crenshaw, 1987). In her writings, Crenshaw tries, as she says, to avoid a “normative judgment” about terrorism. However, Walter Laqueur (not known for the neutrality of his views on the subject) says that “there is no such thing as pure, unalloyed, unchanging terrorism, but there are many forms of terrorism. In the circumstances, a case may be made for broader and, of necessity, vaguer definitions” (Laqueur, 1987, p. 145). More typical of such definitions was that of the US Task Force on Disorders and Terrorism (1976), which defined terrorism as “violent criminal behavior designed primarily to generate fear in the community . . . for political purposes” (U.S. Department of Justice, 1976). Other definitions of terrorism describe individual hijackings of commercial transport vehicles or state terrorism, which involves training and deploying assassins and paramilitary guerrilla bands to invade another land. In terms of objectives, terrorists may be grouped into those seeking financial reward (criminals), those seeking personal glory and fame (crazies), and those using violence for political goals (crusaders) (Hacker, 1976). Terrorist groups may also be categorized across the political spectrum as extremists of the right (e.g., neo-Fascist, KKK, racist); leftist (e.g., anarchist, Maoists); national liberation (e.g., IRA, PLO); or religious evangelists (e.g., Hanafi Muslims and Islamic Jihad). Terrorists themselves advertise their political goals, preferring to be called freedom fighters, revolutionaries, liberators, soldiers or nationalists. These defensive terms are meant to combat the pejorative abuse uniformly heaped upon them in most mass media. Occasionally, however, extremist or marginal newspapers (like certain government-controlled media) have used similar favorable terms to describe those militant bands with whose violent motives or politics they agree. Simply put, terrorism may be red, brown, or black; uniformed or dressed in ethnic regalia; or otherwise decked out to communicate and symbolize their “just” cause against a powerful and evil enemy, the state. In more technologically primitive days, terrorists frequently demanded media interviews, press releases, printing of demands, statements, or photographs, and the like. More recently, however, terrorist (or quasi-terrorist) groups have produced 258 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 259 During the 1980s, we had the dubious advantage of more than 100 opperative videotaped reports on the condition of hostages, used hostages as spokespersons, definitions of terrorism. One expert on the subject, Martha Crenshaw (1987, pp. 4- spoken directly to television audiences, or even compiled a documentary record for 8), defines terrorism as “a strategy any political actor can use.” She also says that it publication of their exploits (as the Animal Liberation Front did in 1985 after a requires few resources (i.e., it is cheap); it involves “violent coercion” in order “to California laboratory break-in). Their increasing use of new video technology is intimidate an opponent”; and “it is intended to compel a change in an enemy’s evidence of the parallel development between terrorism and the media. As Laqueur behavior by affecting his will, not to destroy the enemy physically” (Crenshaw, says, “the media are the terrorists’ best friends” (Laqueur, March 1976). He also 1987). Terrorism also relies on suspense and “psychological reactions of shock, maintains that “the terrorists’ act by itself is nothing; publicity is all.” So close is outrage, and sometimes, enthusiasm” (Crenshaw, 1987). Moreover, terrorism this connection that one Associated Press correspondent recently claimed that usually occurs in times of peace rather than war. Noncombatants are the usual terrorists are so media-wise that they now play journalists “like a violin” objects; the targets or victims have symbolic value, being representatives of a class, (Livingstone, 1987, p. 220). Of course, the most severe critics of media’s role in nation, or a cause. Crenshaw concludes: “Terrorism is fundamentally a strategy of publicizing terrorist exploits would like to enroll media as a front-line soldier in demoralization, directed against the entire population of a nation rather than its fighting back or winning the war against terrorism, labeled a “hydra of carnage,” in armed forces, as would be the case in traditional warfare” (Crenshaw, 1987). “low-intensity operations.” Also of note is the use of this military jargon for a small In her writings, Crenshaw tries, as she says, to avoid a “normative judgment” war (Livingstone and Arnold, 1987; Ra’anan, et al., 1986). about terrorism. However, Walter Laqueur (not known for the neutrality of his Picard and Adams (March 1988) point out that both media and actual witnesses views on the subject) says that “there is no such thing as pure, unalloyed, to acts of political violence use more neutral nominal language (such as shooting unchanging terrorism, but there are many forms of terrorism. In the circumstances, and attacker) to delineate events, whereas government officials use more highly a case may be made for broader and, of necessity, vaguer definitions” (Laqueur, charged, descriptive words (such as criminals, terrorists, and murderers). The latter 1987, p. 145). More typical of such definitions was that of the US Task Force on are more judgmental, inflammatory, and sensationalistic. In these stories, the Disorders and Terrorism (1976), which defined terrorism as “violent criminal primary media characterizations were of their own making. Media seldom quoted behavior designed primarily to generate fear in the community . . . for political primary sources. This occurred only 6% of the time in relevant Los Angeles Times, purposes” (U.S. Department of Justice, 1976). Other definitions of terrorism New York Times, and Washington Post stories from 1980 to 1985. describe individual hijackings of commercial transport vehicles or state terrorism, Complaining that US and Soviet journalists also have no real understanding of which involves training and deploying assassins and paramilitary guerrilla bands to the other’s conceptions of either freedom or of terrorism, Cooper further defines the invade another land. In terms of objectives, terrorists may be grouped into those problem in this way: seeking financial reward (criminals), those seeking personal glory and fame (crazies), and those using violence for political goals (crusaders) (Hacker, 1976). The sum total of people categorized as terrorists do not fit a pat, unchanging stereotype. Terrorist groups may also be categorized across the political spectrum as In-depth interviews with those depicted as terrorists in many countries do not reveal a uniform pattern of deranged, hostile, illiterate, macho, psychotic madmen. Although extremists of the right (e.g., neo-Fascist, KKK, racist); leftist (e.g., anarchist, such people exist, much, if not all, of our monolithic image of terrorists is presented to Maoists); national liberation (e.g., IRA, PLO); or religious evangelists (e.g., Hanafi us, not by people who call themselves terrorists, but by mass media (Cooper, July 1988, Muslims and Islamic Jihad). Terrorists themselves advertise their political goals, p. 5). preferring to be called freedom fighters, revolutionaries, liberators, soldiers or nationalists. These defensive terms are meant to combat the pejorative abuse Since few, if any, of us have seen, spoken to, or met a terrorist (or are likely uniformly heaped upon them in most mass media. Occasionally, however, to), we are at some disadvantage. The same unfamiliarity applies when we appraise extremist or marginal newspapers (like certain government-controlled media) have the worth of foreign news personalities such as Arafat and Qaddafi. Much the same used similar favorable terms to describe those militant bands with whose violent ignorance also prevails among those strangers who label Americans as “state motives or politics they agree. Simply put, terrorism may be red, brown, or black; terrorists.” Actually, we may each share the undesirable attributes we assign to one uniformed or dressed in ethnic regalia; or otherwise decked out to communicate another: a low estimation of human life; lack of mutual respect; projection of power and symbolize their “just” cause against a powerful and evil enemy, the state. orientations; demonstrated rigidity; and espousal of a self-serving ideology. In more technologically primitive days, terrorists frequently demanded media Although the Nixon administration had its domestic enemies list, a high interviews, press releases, printing of demands, statements, or photographs, and the priority of the Reagan administration was the production of an international like. More recently, however, terrorist (or quasi-terrorist) groups have produced enemies list. Those so listed at various times included the USSR (branded the “focus of evil” or the “evil empire”) or the so-called outlaw Qaddafi regime in 260 Russell F. Farnen Libya whose leader is regularly called a madman. Increasingly, the public idiom leads the citizenry to automatically equate many of these enemies with terrorism so that the words enemy and terrorist have virtually become so synonymous and interchangeable that the resultant need to declare war on international terrorism becomes self-evident. In 1989, much the same sequence of events led to a renewed war on drugs when “narcoterrorists” in Colombia were declared US public enemies, fully deserving the complete attention of the president, his “drug czar,” William Bennett, the Department of State, and the US military, if need be. In the drug war, all alternatives are considered save legalization and public control of drugs – considered an immoral choice. Alcohol regulation had a similar history in that it has been banned and legalized, taxed and allowed duty free, plus used medicinally and declared the nation’s most dangerous drug. In popular and official perception, alcohol abuse has variously been deemed immoral, showing a lack of willpower, illegal, a disease, and now (by the Veterans Administration and the federal courts) a self-inflicted, preventable illness, which does not deserve veteran’s health benefits. These various public and social definitions of disease (as with AIDS) and definitions of and responses to terrorism are critical in the identification and solution of a public problem. Noam Chomsky’s radical critique of “the culture of terrorism” assumes American responsibility for what it gets back internationally because of what he calls “the fifth freedom” that is, America’s “freedom to rob, to exploit, and to dominate, to undertake any course of action to ensure that existing privilege is protected and advanced” (Chomsky, 1986 and 1988). Chomsky documents America’s role in Latin-American, African, and Asian repression and provides evidence of US state terrorism and clandestine terrorism activities throughout the world now and in the recent past. He also assails the Reagan administration’s conservative “right turn” politics and decries that administration’s establishment of thought-control programs and agencies, such as Operation Truth and the Office of Public Diplomacy. These activities are “wholesale terrorism” in Chomsky’s vernacular, whereas what passes for terrorism on the evening news is merely “retail terrorism” by individuals and groups. In sum, Chomsky’s view of the media- supported official terrorist line is summed up in his quotation from Henry David Thoreau, who wrote in his Journal over a century ago: There is no need of a law to check the license of the press. It is law enough, and more than enough, to itself. Virtually, the community have come together and agreed what things shall be uttered, have agreed on a platform and to excommunicate him who departs from it, and not one in a thousand dares utter anything else (Chomsky, 1986, p. 37). Worse yet is Chomsky’s fear that the people will not lack courage to express themselves, but rather that they will not have the capacity to think since they are products of the “engineers of democratic consent.” 260 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 261 Libya whose leader is regularly called a madman. Increasingly, the public idiom America’s violent films, political assassinations, racial conflicts, violent leads the citizenry to automatically equate many of these enemies with terrorism so strikes, use and threat of military force and massive retaliation, drug wars among that the words enemy and terrorist have virtually become so synonymous and urban guerrillas, and hundreds of thousands of annual highway injuries and deaths interchangeable that the resultant need to declare war on international terrorism seem to validate the description of America as a violent society. By comparison, becomes self-evident. In 1989, much the same sequence of events led to a renewed Arafat, the George Washington/Charles DeGaulle of the PLO, claims to be just a war on drugs when “narcoterrorists” in Colombia were declared US public freedom fighter, resisting the appellation state terrorist of the Israelis and their enemies, fully deserving the complete attention of the president, his “drug czar,” American allies. But all of this PLO “terrorism,” American “Ramboism,” Qaddafi William Bennett, the Department of State, and the US military, if need be. “irrationality,” and like creations are products of the mass media, bearing only In the drug war, all alternatives are considered save legalization and public some, if little, resemblance to reality. control of drugs – considered an immoral choice. Alcohol regulation had a similar Terrorist groups are frequently foreign or exotic, unknown or inexplicable, or history in that it has been banned and legalized, taxed and allowed duty free, plus religious based; they also produce disinformation and thrive on military secrecy, used medicinally and declared the nation’s most dangerous drug. In popular and group bonds, or a blood pact. When mass media approach such groups, they are official perception, alcohol abuse has variously been deemed immoral, showing a bound to fail in their comprehension, story telling, or reporting since their lack of willpower, illegal, a disease, and now (by the Veterans Administration and perceptions are seldom realistic, often adversarial, and always distorted. They are the federal courts) a self-inflicted, preventable illness, which does not deserve also at times self-serving, biased, or ethnocentric, and they are frequently rigid, veteran’s health benefits. These various public and social definitions of disease (as ideological, purposeful, and negative. While terrorism is at best unpleasant, it with AIDS) and definitions of and responses to terrorism are critical in the deserves the benefit of a realistic treatment. By denying it such treatment, we not identification and solution of a public problem. only are dishonest to ourselves, but we also infuriate and heighten the animosity of Noam Chomsky’s radical critique of “the culture of terrorism” assumes these supposed adversaries both today and tomorrow (Cooper, July 1988, p. 5). American responsibility for what it gets back internationally because of what he calls “the fifth freedom” that is, America’s “freedom to rob, to exploit, and to Media Defined and Described dominate, to undertake any course of action to ensure that existing privilege is protected and advanced” (Chomsky, 1986 and 1988). Chomsky documents Large, syndicated, multinational corporations and governments have dominant America’s role in Latin-American, African, and Asian repression and provides control over newspapers and television throughout the world. Ownership and evidence of US state terrorism and clandestine terrorism activities throughout the control are increasingly centralized. The major purpose of the media is not, as the world now and in the recent past. He also assails the Reagan administration’s New York Times masthead claims, to publish “all the news that’s fit to print,” but conservative “right turn” politics and decries that administration’s establishment of rather just that news it takes to achieve high readership (or ratings in the case of thought-control programs and agencies, such as Operation Truth and the Office of radio and television). Consequently, a newspaper today (though less so in Europe) Public Diplomacy. These activities are “wholesale terrorism” in Chomsky’s is merely a bundle of advertisements wrapped in a tissue of news, features, and vernacular, whereas what passes for terrorism on the evening news is merely “retail photographs. Since the corporate spirit runs high in Western capitalist economies, terrorism” by individuals and groups. In sum, Chomsky’s view of the media- even Andy Warhol said, “Good business is good art.” So the twin arts of journalism supported official terrorist line is summed up in his quotation from Henry David and terrorism have negotiated a mutually beneficial contract: One is rewarded with Thoreau, who wrote in his Journal over a century ago: dollars and the other with instant fame and publicity. As on television (the pictorial headline news), what sells the particular There is no need of a law to check the license of the press. It is law enough, and more communications medium is the bizarre, the investigative report, the exposé, the than enough, to itself. Virtually, the community have come together and agreed what heinous crime, the sexy, or the spectacular. The average viewer or reader spends things shall be uttered, have agreed on a platform and to excommunicate him who very little time using the educational or informational components of the mass departs from it, and not one in a thousand dares utter anything else (Chomsky, 1986, p. media. For example, readers spend an average of 16 minutes with a US newspaper, 37). concentrating mainly on sports, features, advertising, and “soft” news. By contrast, Worse yet is Chomsky’s fear that the people will not lack courage to express opinion leaders spend more time with a variety of media and are better informed. themselves, but rather that they will not have the capacity to think since they are However, the average viewer prefers entertainment to education and the “cool” products of the “engineers of democratic consent.” television to the “hot” printed message. ABC’s Sander Vanocur discounts the 262 Russell F. Farnen “enlightenment or education business” functions of mass media as well as “the people’s right-to-know” argument for a free press. He says that media: . . . are in a business, the business of information. Whatever anyone else may claim for us, that is what we are supposed to do – pass on information, as best we can, as quickly as we can (Ra’anan, et al., 1986, p. 259). In maintaining this position, Vanocur must necessarily forget the longstanding US custom and tradition (codified in the Federal Communications Act of 1934), which links an informed and educated public to the existence of a free government. Without this social objective, there is no need for the First Amendment’s guarantee of a free and unfettered press. He must also necessarily ignore the Federal Communications Act, FCC regulations, and federal law, which have regulated radio, cable, and television broadcasts in the public interest for the last 50 years. For most of this time, laws and regulations required documentary evidence of public-service broadcasting for approval of a station’s license renewal application. Of course, these public-service standards were minimal, shabby, and perfunctorily enforced. A free and responsible press in the US precludes prior restraint, but public responsibility under law also makes the media subject to prosecution under laws governing libel and slander. By 1989, television’s equal time doctrine (under congressional mandate) alone survived the onslaught of the Reagan “deregulation revolution.” This policy abolished restrictions, limits, or requirements for fairness, children’s news, and public affairs programming, programming logs, and advertising time. That was a decided swing away from previous FCC rules, dating from the 1960s. However, the FCC pendulum may still swing the other way. Congress may also involve itself more directly in legislative oversight of communications. The free market may yet abuse the public interest too severely by adhering to the communications-as-business philosophy, the result of a privatization obsession led from the Reagan and Bush White Houses. Instead of defining the media as information or news agencies, perhaps it is useful and more accurate to accept some of Vanocur’s argument. We may agree that the media (particularly radio and television) are mainly in the profitable entertainment business – sexual and violent entertainment at that. Mass media operate on providing minimum context, supplying broad and quick coverage, and giving the reader or viewer what he or she wants. At best, the context for news is the standard journalistic litany of answering the who, what, when, where, how, and occasionally, why questions learned in Journalism 101 classes. Seldom do the media provide their readers or viewers with the background, context, or parallel information needed to follow a story over time or to understand a topic in depth. It is a small wonder that readers and views cannot internalize, assimilate, and conceptualize a story into their highly valuative, cognitive maps and perceptual frames of reference. The texts of news stories and television scripts are often more 262 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 263 “enlightenment or education business” functions of mass media as well as “the “writerly” than “readerly.” In the absence of regular coverage, with context, for an people’s right-to-know” argument for a free press. He says that media: important continuing story or recurrent social theme (such as work hazards, defense, or violence toward others), the reader cannot realistically understand the . . . are in a business, the business of information. Whatever anyone else may claim for news. When Bhopal, defense corruption, or the latest terrorist story catapult on the us, that is what we are supposed to do – pass on information, as best we can, as quickly as we can (Ra’anan, et al., 1986, p. 259). screen or front page week after week, they remain unique, inexplicable, strange, and forever inassimilable and meaningless. In maintaining this position, Vanocur must necessarily forget the longstanding Certain basic requirements are necessary for the news genre’s existence. That US custom and tradition (codified in the Federal Communications Act of 1934), is, news must be timely (critical, crisis, recent); unique (new, fresh); entertaining which links an informed and educated public to the existence of a free government. (drama, pathos); adventurous (dangerous, a horse race, unfolding, risky, a life-or- Without this social objective, there is no need for the First Amendment’s guarantee death battle); and it must relate to the reality of the viewer (human identification, of a free and unfettered press. He must also necessarily ignore the Federal everyday life, innocent victims) (Alexander and Finger, 1977). To this list can be Communications Act, FCC regulations, and federal law, which have regulated added two other news criteria: authenticity (validity) and credibility (trust), features radio, cable, and television broadcasts in the public interest for the last 50 years. which both news and terrorist acts share in kind. The predominant journalistic For most of this time, laws and regulations required documentary evidence of values require news to be about unexpected, sensational, and conflictual events. public-service broadcasting for approval of a station’s license renewal application. Violent groups are more than willing to supply an ample measure of each Of course, these public-service standards were minimal, shabby, and perfunctorily ingredient required to make their story newsworthy. enforced. As a case in point of media crisis coverage of violent domestic disturbances, A free and responsible press in the US precludes prior restraint, but public Graber (1989, p. 306) describes the clash over “self-preservation” issues between responsibility under law also makes the media subject to prosecution under laws the media and government. The media’s “responsibility to serve public needs” is in governing libel and slander. By 1989, television’s equal time doctrine (under direct conflict with the government’s desire “to control, direct, and even manipulate congressional mandate) alone survived the onslaught of the Reagan “deregulation the flow of news for public purposes.” Graber finds that crisis coverage typically revolution.” This policy abolished restrictions, limits, or requirements for fairness, runs through three stages. First, when background information on the crisis is children’s news, and public affairs programming, programming logs, and announced, basic details fo who, what, when, where and how are revealed and a advertising time. That was a decided swing away from previous FCC rules, dating kind of ordered panic or chaos prevails while news (frequently distorted and from the 1960s. However, the FCC pendulum may still swing the other way. inaccurate) is spread throughout a “wired” society. At this stage, media messages Congress may also involve itself more directly in legislative oversight of also tend to be calming and convey the message: “Don’t worry. Everything’s communications. The free market may yet abuse the public interest too severely by okay.” Stage two finds the media trying to provide context for the crisis and to adhering to the communications-as-business philosophy, the result of a supply rational and coherent explanations for the event. The final interpretive stage privatization obsession led from the Reagan and Bush White Houses. takes a coping posture and a longer range view. Its goals are tension relief, morale Instead of defining the media as information or news agencies, perhaps it is building, panic prevention, and reinforcing the viewpoint of “everything’s under useful and more accurate to accept some of Vanocur’s argument. We may agree control” in this unique situation. that the media (particularly radio and television) are mainly in the profitable Throughout these stages, the media depend on government sources for their entertainment business – sexual and violent entertainment at that. Mass media information and practice self-censorship to allay fears and to prevent panic. The operate on providing minimum context, supplying broad and quick coverage, and picture portrayed of competent government officials (“doing something”) is giving the reader or viewer what he or she wants. At best, the context for news is reassuring and calming to the media’s viewer, listeners, or readers. As a crisis the standard journalistic litany of answering the who, what, when, where, how, and matures, however, the media may develop a feeding frenzy in their lust for news. occasionally, why questions learned in Journalism 101 classes. Seldom do the For example, crisis coverage of the Detroit riots in 1967, the Three Mile Island media provide their readers or viewers with the background, context, or parallel disaster in 1979, the Tylenol poisonings in 1982, the TWA hijacking in 1985, and information needed to follow a story over time or to understand a topic in depth. It the stock market crash in 1987 all produced unexpected and unanticipated results. is a small wonder that readers and views cannot internalize, assimilate, and Reportage on the Detroit riots produced a multiplier effect by encouraging new conceptualize a story into their highly valuative, cognitive maps and perceptual rioters; similarly, a rash of “copycat” crimes followed the 1982 cyanide deaths. The frames of reference. The texts of news stories and television scripts are often more stock market panic in 1987 was also inflamed when media pointed out its parallel 264 Russell F. Farnen with 1929. The deployment of an antiterrorist strike force against the TWA hijackers was curtailed after widespread media reports eliminated the vital element of surprise (Graber, 1989, pp. 316-317). Despite preexistent and widespread media plans for crisis coverage of natural disasters and civil disorders, the complacency engendered from years of rosy reports on nuclear power plant safety took its toll in 1979. Previous problems at Three Mile Island had been so well hidden, minimized, or ignored that a 3-day delay resulted before a central communications center was established there. This center essentially performed a centralized media censorship and control function for official and corporate press releases. It kept the lid on the crisis through “balanced” new releases. However, other unedited reports from the scene were contradictory, exaggerated, speculative, and frightening to area residents (Graber, 1989, pp. 312, 314, 318). Crisis coverage planning, although widespread, is probably more successful in planning a scenario for covering the event post hoc than it is in either preventing or predicting the crisis. Media personnel regularly assume that widespread panic and contagion will result if the extent of rioting or civil disorder is fully and accurately reported. While relevant social science data do not support this view, media decisionmakers believe violence will beget violence. Therefore, they act accordingly. For example, in the 1967 Winston-Salem riots, the Winston-Salem Journal had a roughly prearranged game plan for reporting on racial violence and cooperation with the police and local officials in order to calm racial tensions and to curb violence (Paletz and Entman, 1981, pp. 114-117). The Journal’s reporting guidelines were designed to limit the news, convey tranquility, blame “thugs” and “hoodlums” for the riots, reduce exaggeration, avoid basic grievances, ignore rumors, and underplay the extent of violence. The guiding maxim was, “when in doubt, leave out.” As the story developed over four days, there were 200 arrests, 100 injuries, extensive property damage, but no deaths. On the first night of rioting, a news blackout was imposed. Thereafter, the story was reported almost exclusively from the viewpoint of the police and local officials, and concentrated on portrayals of blacks who supported the local elite’s game plan. The Journal’s white establishment, reporters, and editors covered events as they would any important crime story where violence threatened legitimate authority. No coverage of minority grievances, underlying social problems, or statements from the black leadership or citizenry was provided to readers. In this way, not only were black demands (e.g., that police brutality against one of their number be investigated and handled) crushed but also: The coverage probably reduced the political power of already inefficacious poor people. Simultaneously, it may have enhanced the prestige of the police department – at least among whites (Paletz and Entman, 1981 p. 117). 264 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 265 with 1929. The deployment of an antiterrorist strike force against the TWA Graber’s viewpoint on the Winston-Salem case is that the official/police/Na- hijackers was curtailed after widespread media reports eliminated the vital element tional Guard/media concurrence could be credited with reducing the level of of surprise (Graber, 1989, pp. 316-317). violence and its harmful effects: Despite preexistent and widespread media plans for crisis coverage of natural disasters and civil disorders, the complacency engendered from years of rosy In the short run this helped keep the situation under control, but the long-run effects of reports on nuclear power plant safety took its toll in 1979. Previous problems at carefully limited coverage are more troubling. In terrorist incidents or prison riots, failure to air the grievances of terrorists and prison inmates deprives them of a public Three Mile Island had been so well hidden, minimized, or ignored that a 3-day forum for voicing their grievances. Their bottled up anger may lead to more violent delay resulted before a central communications center was established there. This explosions. Needed reforms may be aborted (Graber, 1989, p. 322). center essentially performed a centralized media censorship and control function for official and corporate press releases. It kept the lid on the crisis through Graber also discusses the contrary positions of those who would prefer to allow “balanced” new releases. However, other unedited reports from the scene were the violent confrontation or reaction and complete media coverage to run their contradictory, exaggerated, speculative, and frightening to area residents (Graber, course versus those who would mute, censor, and black out overly violent inci- 1989, pp. 312, 314, 318). dents. The former claim that shocking the public conscience is a likely outcome of Crisis coverage planning, although widespread, is probably more successful in extensive and accurate reporting, whereas the latter maintain that more restrained planning a scenario for covering the event post hoc than it is in either preventing or coverage will reduce conflict and hatred while allowing reasoned reform after the predicting the crisis. Media personnel regularly assume that widespread panic and fact. Although the media and public leadership have usually chosen the news contagion will result if the extent of rioting or civil disorder is fully and accurately suppression option, Graber observes: reported. While relevant social science data do not support this view, media The true test of genuine freedom does not come in times of calm. It comes in times of decisionmakers believe violence will beget violence. Therefore, they act crisis when the costs of freedom may be dear, tempting government and media alike to accordingly. For example, in the 1967 Winston-Salem riots, the Winston-Salem impose silence. If a free press is a paramount value, the die must be cast in favor of Journal had a roughly prearranged game plan for reporting on racial violence and unrestrained crisis coverage, moderated only by the sense of responsibility of individual cooperation with the police and local officials in order to calm racial tensions and journalists (Graber, 1989, p. 322). to curb violence (Paletz and Entman, 1981, pp. 114-117). The Journal’s reporting guidelines were designed to limit the news, convey tranquility, blame “thugs” and Media and Terrorism: Symbiotic Relationships “hoodlums” for the riots, reduce exaggeration, avoid basic grievances, ignore rumors, and underplay the extent of violence. The guiding maxim was, “when in Terrorism is different, dramatic, and potentially violent. It frequently develops over a period of time, occurs in exotic locations, offers a clear confrontation, involves bizarre doubt, leave out.” As the story developed over four days, there were 200 arrests, characters, and is politically noteworthy. Finally, it is of concern to the public (Hoge, 100 injuries, extensive property damage, but no deaths. On the first night of rioting, 1982, p. 91). a news blackout was imposed. Thereafter, the story was reported almost exclusively from the viewpoint of the police and local officials, and concentrated Since terrorism so clearly fills the bill as a major news event, media fiercely on portrayals of blacks who supported the local elite’s game plan. compete for coverage, scoops, and live footage or photographs that can be labeled The Journal’s white establishment, reporters, and editors covered events as “exclusives.” This drive to win, as Jody Powell says, is a direct product of the they would any important crime story where violence threatened legitimate competition “for ratings and circulation between newspapers and networks and for authority. No coverage of minority grievances, underlying social problems, or personal advancement within a given news organization” (Livingstone, 1987, p. statements from the black leadership or citizenry was provided to readers. In this 219). Media coverage of the TWA flight 847 hijacking in June 1985 effectively way, not only were black demands (e.g., that police brutality against one of their destroyed certain flimsy, self-imposed media guidelines established for such number be investigated and handled) crushed but also: coverage. Some major print and broadcast agencies developed these standards for coverage as a result of the 1985 Hanafi Muslim’s siege staged in the nation’s The coverage probably reduced the political power of already inefficacious poor people. Simultaneously, it may have enhanced the prestige of the police department – at least capital. Back then, a media orgy saturated the television screens with live stories among whites (Paletz and Entman, 1981 p. 117). and terrorist interviews from the scene. Reporters and radio hosts tied up telephone lines, and the lives of undetected building occupants were endangered they nearly missed an opportunity to escape. 266 Russell F. Farnen Even while recognizing the importance of their roles as virtual abettors of such violence and terrorist’s objectives, many reporters later opposed all guidelines for covering terrorism. Their position was anticensorship, pro-free speech and press, anti-prior restraint, and advocacy of a general “right to know.” During the TWA hijacking, the media actually broadcast events live. They interacted with the terrorists, experts, victims and their relatives, and the pilot, thus becoming an integral part in expanding the problem. Perhaps it was the earlier Iran hostage debacle which set the standard. The latter was so exhaustively and regularly covered (with, for example, a daily countdown of the number of days of hostage captivity) that in a 1981 Washington Journalism Review article, David Altheide concluded that “more media attention was given to the hostages in Iran than any single event in history, including the Vietnam War” (Livingstone, 1987, p. 223). The history of media coverage of terrorism has also provided the validity of Daniel Schorr’s observation that “many people have found that the royal road to identity is to do something violent” (Anzovin, 1986, p. 101). For example, the Palestinian terrorists who attacked the Israeli Olympic team in Munich in 1972 instantly found themselves in the living rooms of over 800 million people. By creating a climate of fear in an attack on (or even killing of) unknown victims, the relatively and comparatively powerless terrorists hope to compel far more powerful state or media officials to comply with their wishes. Since terrorists are so much weaker than the establishment they are challenging, they must use guerilla hit-and- run tactics to create the psychological state of mind needed to ensure public and official compliance with, or acceptance of, certain aggressive goals. The motor of the BR: “Strike one to educate one hundred” is worth noting here as is its similarity to Lenin’s revolutionary slogan: “Kill one, frighten a hundred.” After the BR struck violently, the media ended up educating the public, while the BR served as a principal accomplice in the media war which followed. Indeed, the BR had earlier targeted the media and prominent journalists as potential victims in its war against the multinationals and the “imperialist state.” By 1977, journalists, editors, and members of the Italian press had been branded “servants of the imperialist apparatus of repression.” After several journalists were brutally “kneecapped” or shot dead in quick succession, the popular and press reaction to these violent incidents was equivalent to that following an invasion from outer space. The BR later switched its attention to “armed propaganda” for political recognition and attacks “at the heart of the state” to prove to all that revolution was “within . . . reach.” Media were transformed from objects of attack to useful instru- ments of war. The BR deliberately focused in attacks on “the heart of the state” and enlisted the media as its publicists in the kidnapping of Christian Democrat Party President Aldo Moro in 1978. (Moro previously had been prime minister and foreign minister of Italy for six year.) After Moro’s assassination (in which the government actually exploited the media, as did the terrorists and everyone 266 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 267 Even while recognizing the importance of their roles as virtual abettors of such involved, save Moro himself), the BR kidnapping of a prominent judge (Giovanni violence and terrorist’s objectives, many reporters later opposed all guidelines for D’Urso) in 1980 also allowed them to use media for their purposes before releasing covering terrorism. Their position was anticensorship, pro-free speech and press, their prisoner. A year later, however, the BR shot a hostage after their demand for anti-prior restraint, and advocacy of a general “right to know.” During the TWA media time was rejected. But the kneecappings of journalists and media brutality of hijacking, the media actually broadcast events live. They interacted with the the 1970s were not reinstituted in the 1980s. Instead, the BR created its own media terrorists, experts, victims and their relatives, and the pilot, thus becoming an research and coordination group for public relations, which they called their integral part in expanding the problem. Perhaps it was the earlier Iran hostage “psychological front.” debacle which set the standard. The latter was so exhaustively and regularly As Daniel Schorr observes, television has a “love affair with drama and a love covered (with, for example, a daily countdown of the number of days of hostage affair with violence” (Anzovin, 1986, p. 101). Ted Koppel, ABC’s Nightline host, captivity) that in a 1981 Washington Journalism Review article, David Altheide is of a like mind: concluded that “more media attention was given to the hostages in Iran than any single event in history, including the Vietnam War” (Livingstone, 1987, p. 223). Without television, terrorism becomes rather like the philosopher’s hypothetical tree The history of media coverage of terrorism has also provided the validity of falling in the forest: no one hears it fall and therefore it has no reason for being. And television, without terrorism, while not deprived of all interesting things in the world, is Daniel Schorr’s observation that “many people have found that the royal road to nonetheless deprived of one of the most interesting (Anzovin, 1986, p. 97). identity is to do something violent” (Anzovin, 1986, p. 101). For example, the Palestinian terrorists who attacked the Israeli Olympic team in Munich in 1972 Mass media’s coverage of the news is mainly focused on politicians, corporate instantly found themselves in the living rooms of over 800 million people. By leaders, criminals, athletes, and other public and entertainment figures who have creating a climate of fear in an attack on (or even killing of) unknown victims, the “star quality.” Terrorist leaders also recognize the importance of mass media just as relatively and comparatively powerless terrorists hope to compel far more powerful New Left advocate Jerry Rubin did. He rebuked his revolutionary brothers for state or media officials to comply with their wishes. Since terrorists are so much being “too puritanical” in mass media use, perhaps because “Karl Marx never weaker than the establishment they are challenging, they must use guerilla hit-and- watched television.” “You can’t be a revolutionary today without a television set,” run tactics to create the psychological state of mind needed to ensure public and he wrote, “It’s as important as a gun” (Rubin, 1970, p. 108). official compliance with, or acceptance of, certain aggressive goals. And use the media they do. Terrorists use dozens of sophisticated media The motor of the BR: “Strike one to educate one hundred” is worth noting here techniques, such as direct public communication of their grievances, demands, and as is its similarity to Lenin’s revolutionary slogan: “Kill one, frighten a hundred.” requirements for compliance. They also seek to form public opinion by After the BR struck violently, the media ended up educating the public, while the disinformation, “confessions” from hostages, criticisms of the government, direct BR served as a principal accomplice in the media war which followed. Indeed, the broadcasts over open network channels, and appeals for help. These groups often BR had earlier targeted the media and prominent journalists as potential victims in directly attack the media by using violence against journalists or by using jour- its war against the multinationals and the “imperialist state.” By 1977, journalists, nalists as negotiators. They also bomb or occupy broadcast facilities. Through the editors, and members of the Italian press had been branded “servants of the media, they can also advertise their cause, incurring favorable attention through imperialist apparatus of repression.” After several journalists were brutally releasing hostages, thus seeking Robin Hood status. Such groups also use the media “kneecapped” or shot dead in quick succession, the popular and press reaction to as watchdogs against police perfidy to learn about hostage identities, possible these violent incidents was equivalent to that following an invasion from outer police reprisals, and current public opinion; to communicate with allies; and to space. identify targets or enemies to be dealt with in the future (Schmid and de Graaf, The BR later switched its attention to “armed propaganda” for political 1982, pp. 53-54). recognition and attacks “at the heart of the state” to prove to all that revolution was Even a spokesman for the PLO recognized the importance of media in its quest “within . . . reach.” Media were transformed from objects of attack to useful instru- for United Nations observer status and legitimacy saying: “the first hijackings ments of war. The BR deliberately focused in attacks on “the heart of the state” and aroused the consciousness of the world and awakened the media and world opinion enlisted the media as its publicists in the kidnapping of Christian Democrat Party much more – and more efficiently – than 20 years of pleading at the United Na- President Aldo Moro in 1978. (Moro previously had been prime minister and tions” (Hickey, 1976, p. 10). As Paul Lazarsfeld and Robert K. Merton recognized foreign minister of Italy for six year.) After Moro’s assassination (in which the in 1948, the media also provide a “status-conferral” function (i.e., by singling out government actually exploited the media, as did the terrorists and everyone terrorism for the mass audience, these behaviors and opinions are seen as 268 Russell F. Farnen significant enough to deserve public notice) for terrorists (Lazarsfeld and Merton, 1971, pp. 554-578). Moreover, media coverage not only provides free publicity for the terrorists, but also may establish them as role models for others. There also may be a spiraling cycle of violence (i.e., and interactive effect between the quantity of media coverage and the scale of terrorist violence). However, which factor (media or violent incident) causes this or what else causes both is often unclear. Media coverage affects the public and combative groups alike. Regardless of their motives, as terrorists upscale their violence, they are reinforced and rewarded with more media coverage. In turn, as media coverage increases, terrorists are encouraged to top their last execution, threat, or demand (Weimann, 1983; Tan, 1987, p. 151). This view of terrorism as an epidemic that news media spread (though believed by the public, press, and some experts) is not supported in the social science literature as other than a contributing cause. Some of the associated allegations which remain unsubstantiated include beliefs that new groups are formed, new actions are incited, public support is generated, the level of violence is escalated, and media control is forfeited to the terrorists. There is little proof that the press is so powerful as either potential censors or terrorist groups may imagine. Nevertheless, in 1985, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher called for press controls which would deny terrorists and hijackers of the “oxygen of publicity” needed to fuel the resultant flames of their violence. Edwin Diamond of New York University’s News Study Group claimed in a TV Guide article that once the television put a human face on the TWA flight 847 passengers and crew and charged the incident with “everyday emotions,” then “all military options were dead” (TV Guide, July 31, 1976). CBS’s Lesley Stahl said of the press, “We are an instrument for the hostages. We force the administration to put their lives above policy” (Davies, October 1985, p. 4). Consequently, these events become “institutionalized crises” which crowd out all other news (Picard, July 1988, p. 1). And Michael J. Davies, former editor and publisher of the Hartford Courant, typified news personnel’s attitudes when he said: Publicity is the lifeblood of terrorism. Without it, these abominable acts against the innocent would wither quickly away. Yet few responsible critics would suggest that the media enter into a conspiracy of silence that would ignore all acts of international terrorism (Davies, October 1985, p. 5). By and large, the media-as-contagion theory depends on transferring the findings of televised violence and aggression to the terrorism arena. However, widespread public perceptions also support this relationship. The popularity of this view among law enforcement officials has helped gain support from some experts (such as M. C. Bassiouni, who said that, except for the “ideologically motivated,” there is a certain “intuitive reasonableness” to the contagion theory. Schmid and de Graaf (1988, p. 2), two Dutch experts, also claimed that media reports helped to 268 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 269 significant enough to deserve public notice) for terrorists (Lazarsfeld and Merton, “reduce inhibitions” and offered “models,” “know-how,” and motivations to 1971, pp. 554-578). Moreover, media coverage not only provides free publicity for potential terrorists. the terrorists, but also may establish them as role models for others. In response, others (such as Brian Jenkins of the RAND Corporation) reply that There also may be a spiraling cycle of violence (i.e., and interactive effect “the news media are responsible for terrorism to about the same extent that between the quantity of media coverage and the scale of terrorist violence). commercial aviation is responsible for the airline hijackings” (i.e., the media are However, which factor (media or violent incident) causes this or what else causes just “another vulnerability” in a highly vulnerable technological and free society) both is often unclear. Media coverage affects the public and combative groups (Schmid and de Graaf, 1988, p. 31). Other related studies have shed some light on alike. Regardless of their motives, as terrorists upscale their violence, they are this phenomenon. For example, hierarchy was used in one study by Midlarsky, reinforced and rewarded with more media coverage. In turn, as media coverage Crenshaw, and Yoshida (June 1980) as a theory to explain the spread of terrorism increases, terrorists are encouraged to top their last execution, threat, or demand “from the least powerful” and “from the weak states to the strong” (i.e., from Latin (Weimann, 1983; Tan, 1987, p. 151). This view of terrorism as an epidemic that America to Western Europe). European terrorist groups borrow ideology, rhetoric, news media spread (though believed by the public, press, and some experts) is not and methods from the Third World, as well as techniques of bombing, which supported in the social science literature as other than a contributing cause. Some transfer quite easily. Through intergroup cooperation, they move across boundaries of the associated allegations which remain unsubstantiated include beliefs that new to new locations that provide a suitable site for the proposed act. The careful groups are formed, new actions are incited, public support is generated, the level of planning and specialized technical knowledge that some groups display could not violence is escalated, and media control is forfeited to the terrorists. have been learned from television or in newspapers. Diffusion of these ideas is There is little proof that the press is so powerful as either potential censors or more likely based on interpersonal channels of communications. The media’s role terrorist groups may imagine. Nevertheless, in 1985, Prime Minister Margaret in furthering the awareness aspect of the process (if not in the evaluation, Thatcher called for press controls which would deny terrorists and hijackers of the acceptance, and adaptation parts of the same process) may reinforce, if not cause, “oxygen of publicity” needed to fuel the resultant flames of their violence. Edwin such diffusion. At any rate, diffusion theory probably offers a better line of research Diamond of New York University’s News Study Group claimed in a TV Guide than does the imitative effect of “copycat” violent acts, scenes, and situations. article that once the television put a human face on the TWA flight 847 passengers Since media engage in sensationalism, can interfere with law enforcement, may and crew and charged the incident with “everyday emotions,” then “all military endanger lives and help spread irrational fears, they have become closely options were dead” (TV Guide, July 31, 1976). CBS’s Lesley Stahl said of the associated with terrorism, though they still have not become its primary cause. press, “We are an instrument for the hostages. We force the administration to put Moreover, if terrorism really seeks the media publicity it gets through violence, their lives above policy” (Davies, October 1985, p. 4). Consequently, these events why should potential terrorists not receive appropriate media coverage for their become “institutionalized crises” which crowd out all other news (Picard, July grievances before they resort to violence? Not only can the media adopt a 1988, p. 1). And Michael J. Davies, former editor and publisher of the Hartford responsible, reasoned, and measured approach to terrorism, once begun, but they Courant, typified news personnel’s attitudes when he said: can also regularly provide ample outlets for expressions of relevant public and group concerns, thereby addressing or reducing grievances, while evaluating Publicity is the lifeblood of terrorism. Without it, these abominable acts against the current controversial public policies. Such a modified response to terrorism would innocent would wither quickly away. Yet few responsible critics would suggest that the media enter into a conspiracy of silence that would ignore all acts of international actually require more, although very different, coverage of terrorist violence. This terrorism (Davies, October 1985, p. 5). could be done without glamorizing the perpetrators. New media formats could provide useful and valid information, consider consequences of past or hypothetical By and large, the media-as-contagion theory depends on transferring the acts, improve the public’s capacity to deal with large crises, aim to reduce attendant findings of televised violence and aggression to the terrorism arena. However, public fears, and increase the public’s understanding. These new formats could widespread public perceptions also support this relationship. The popularity of this provide continual context while they perhaps help to reduce the general level of view among law enforcement officials has helped gain support from some experts violence in the society (US Department of Justice, 1976, p. 65; Picard, July 1988, (such as M. C. Bassiouni, who said that, except for the “ideologically motivated,” pp. 4-6). there is a certain “intuitive reasonableness” to the contagion theory. Schmid and de As the terrorist sideshow unfolds, the public is usually mesmerized. Viewers Graaf (1988, p. 2), two Dutch experts, also claimed that media reports helped to see the black-and-white spectacle of heroes and villains fighting it out, not on the set of Miami Vice, but in a real scene with real guns, bullets, bombs, hostages, and 270 Russell F. Farnen murders. They are eyewitnesses to a human morality play, with its real winners and losers. In a way, this portrayal even becomes the “theater of the obscene” in that the television screen (reinforced in radio, newspaper, and magazine features) displays a huge international “snuff film,” rivaling execution scenes from World War II and Vietnam documentary footage. These real-life scenarios are left to the viewer to interpret. The media seldom report the social, economic, or political objectives or rationales for these unpaid terrorist “actors” who play starring roles even though they are not members of Actors’ Equity (Paletz, Ayanian, and Fozzard, 1982, p. 166). Indeed, the media’s message, though antiviolent, may have other appeals to different audiences. Media effects reveal that the public may use their sense of a “just world” for evaluative purposes. Here, even the victims may be held respon- sible for their own suffering, the terrorists may be absolved of guilt, or the terrorist grievance, redress, or cause against the government may be supported. On this point, Schmid and de Graaf conclude: Through the way the media present terroristic news, through selection of some facts out of the multitude of potentially relevant facts, through the associations they lay between the terroristic act and the social context, the media can have a profound influence that can create public hysteria, witchhunts, fatalism, and all sorts of other reactions that serve certain political interests – and not only those of the terrorists (Schmid and de Graaf, 1982, p. 98). Dobkin (1989 and November 1989) recently described the terrorism and media connection as one in which the American government has not only manufactured the problem and dominated both its definition and public importance, and, therefore, its “public ownership” and “responsibility” for the problem, but has also turned the issue into “an instrument of US foreign policy.” In contrast to traditional research, which stresses the interdependence of terrorism and media coverage (“media determinism”), Dobkin emphasizes the power inherent in the national security state not only to engineer popular consent, but also to enlist public support for state-sponsored, official repression. Creating a so-called public crisis cuts off nonmilitary responses. The increasing level of panic and cycle of violence challenge international order. It requires the government to act in a lethal way while either muzzling the media or so dominating the terms of discourse that alternatives to military action (e.g., redress of any legitimate grievances) cannot easily be considered (Dobkin, November 1989, pp. 1, 21). Similarly, America’s 40-year dependence on deterrence theory and mutual assured destruction (MAD) also has its impact on terrorism, as does classic just war theory’s emphasis on proportionality in meeting an armed attack. Since the public and its leaders believe that deterrence has kept the peace, we are at a loss to explain why a group of terrorist Lilliputians can so effectively cripple the powerful American Gulliver. “Why does deterrence not work?” we ask, never recognizing 270 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 271 murders. They are eyewitnesses to a human morality play, with its real winners and that this idea is actually irrelevant to the type of low-intensity, civil-war, or guerilla losers. In a way, this portrayal even becomes the “theater of the obscene” in that the conflict to which terrorism is similar. television screen (reinforced in radio, newspaper, and magazine features) displays a huge international “snuff film,” rivaling execution scenes from World War II and The Brigate Rosse and the Moro Case Vietnam documentary footage. These real-life scenarios are left to the viewer to interpret. The media seldom report the social, economic, or political objectives or Two interesting pieces of research apply to the question of what terrorists get from rationales for these unpaid terrorist “actors” who play starring roles even though the media. The first from Italy is a January 10, 1982 opinion poll published in they are not members of Actors’ Equity (Paletz, Ayanian, and Fozzard, 1982, p. L’Espresso. It indicated that whereas 31% of the Italian public believed that the BR 166). were “dangerous murderers” (negative), over 30% believed that the BR “aims at Indeed, the media’s message, though antiviolent, may have other appeals to achieving a just goal by using the wrong means” (positive), and 10% believed that different audiences. Media effects reveal that the public may use their sense of a they led the “fight for a better society” (mixed, positive). Certainly, the media’s “just world” for evaluative purposes. Here, even the victims may be held respon- coverage of terrorism was not expected to produce such results. The violent nature sible for their own suffering, the terrorists may be absolved of guilt, or the terrorist of Italian society, a preference for spectacle politics, longstanding divisive and grievance, redress, or cause against the government may be supported. On this fractious party activity, higher frequency of regime change, and cops-and-robbers point, Schmid and de Graaf conclude: of “Keystone Kops” approaches to resolving domestic violence may be contributing factors to this totally unexpected, unintended, and often hidden aspect Through the way the media present terroristic news, through selection of some facts out of the problem (Payerhin, 1988, p. 14). of the multitude of potentially relevant facts, through the associations they lay between Why this happens may in part be explained through an interesting, but small- the terroristic act and the social context, the media can have a profound influence that scale, American research project Gabriel Weimann queried students about their can create public hysteria, witchhunts, fatalism, and all sorts of other reactions that serve reactions to reading stories about two obscure terrorist groups in the context of total certain political interests – and not only those of the terrorists (Schmid and de Graaf, 1982, p. 98). group attitudes and opinions about terrorism. Those reading about these South Moluccan and Croatian groups remained generally negative toward terrorism. Dobkin (1989 and November 1989) recently described the terrorism and media However, after exposure to these news articles, between 43% and 51% of the connection as one in which the American government has not only manufactured exposed group labeled the problem “important,” in need of greater public the problem and dominated both its definition and public importance, and, knowledge, and a subject of interest to them. The control group’s responses to therefore, its “public ownership” and “responsibility” for the problem, but has also similar questions was significantly lower (16%, 14%, and 33%, respectively). In turned the issue into “an instrument of US foreign policy.” In contrast to traditional other words, there may be an unintended media enhancement of terrorist activity, research, which stresses the interdependence of terrorism and media coverage which is either promoted and/or obscured through media treatment of “terrorism as (“media determinism”), Dobkin emphasizes the power inherent in the national a spectacle” (Weimann, 1983, p. 43). security state not only to engineer popular consent, but also to enlist public support What do the newspapers and television get out of this coverage of political for state-sponsored, official repression. Creating a so-called public crisis cuts off extremism? And what does the political regime have to gain from this process? The nonmilitary responses. The increasing level of panic and cycle of violence government clearly dominates most news sources and official reports during most challenge international order. It requires the government to act in a lethal way terrorist crises. Moreover, since many European countries (FRG, UK, France, etc.) while either muzzling the media or so dominating the terms of discourse that have terrorist/media guidelines, public officials can limit media excesses that alternatives to military action (e.g., redress of any legitimate grievances) cannot “glorify” terrorists. Since the media take the law-and-order, social control theme to easily be considered (Dobkin, November 1989, pp. 1, 21). heart during such a crisis, the government gets its favorite tune played in the Similarly, America’s 40-year dependence on deterrence theory and mutual terrorist saga. During such episodes, the competence of the regime is displayed assured destruction (MAD) also has its impact on terrorism, as does classic just war since the officials orchestrating the state response look powerful, competent, in theory’s emphasis on proportionality in meeting an armed attack. Since the public control, popular, and act in the public interest. Since the government actually wins and its leaders believe that deterrence has kept the peace, we are at a loss to explain nearly all these “battles” in the long run (if not today, then tomorrow), these why a group of terrorist Lilliputians can so effectively cripple the powerful terrorist “Davids” have little chance against the state “Goliaths.” American Gulliver. “Why does deterrence not work?” we ask, never recognizing Palmerton has examined CBS news coverage during the first days of the 1979 Iranian hostage crisis. Although of limited scope, her study concludes that news 272 Russell F. Farnen coverage reinforced the terrorist strategy by focusing the cause (or blame) for the crisis on US governmental institutions and by suggesting that military action was necessary to reestablish institutional control. Furthermore, she finds that the “rhetorical impact of terrorism” is mainly a function of others’ responses (particularly the media) to terrorist activity. A peincipal problem of regions under terrorist attack is how to maintain both control and one’s status as a victim of terrorism. Indeed, as she says, “the primary threat to governmental institutions is not the lives lost in terrorist acts, but the questioning of governmental institutions” (Palmerton, 1988, p. 105). Lack of realistic and proportional perspective about the terrorist danger or threat in media reports on terrorism helps to construct “a variety of meanings about terrorist events” and “those meanings may well serve the terrorist cause” (Palmerton, 1988, p. 117). As for the mass media’s gains from terrorism, besides the “hot” news akin to a continuing soap opera/criminal film, what else does the publisher or broadcaster gain? Because the crime beat and reports of violence are part of the daily diet of all media, it is no surprise that terrorism, hijacking, armed siege, political violence, assassinations, and like crimes against the state and people are given widespread publicity. In the case of terrorism, media have a virtual gold mine of news which never dries up or pans out – it has universal appeal and a built-in demand for more coverage up to and beyond the saturation point. An interesting case in point is the Italian media’s treatment, coverage, and involvement with the state, the hostage, and the BR during the kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro and five of his bodyguards in 1978. Since the Moro crisis lasted nearly two months during the spring of 1978, the roles of all prominent forces and actors in this bloody drama had a chance to be played out with the predictability of an ancient Roman coliseum scene. The saga was complete with “Christians” (Moro and his martyred bodyguards), BR “lions,” state “Caesars,” media “tribunes,” and the anxious Italian public, ever eager for more bread, circuses, and carnivals. Wagner-Pacifica (1987) has described the “Moro morality play” as a form of “social drama.” Ignoring for the moment the complex state, corporate, and party links of the Italian press and broadcast media, Italians’ media usage differs appreciably from that of northern European and other Western European publics. For example, regular newspaper purchases are among the lowest in Europe, particularly in the southern parts of the country. The media in Italy are also strong on debate, rhetoric, conflict, journalistic competition, and sordid exhibitions, particularly reports on widespread crime and violence. There is a minimum level of confirmed sources, careful investigation, analysis of causes, background context, and socially productive reporting. One fact is clear, however: the public’s attention to the media skyrocketed once the Moro case hit the streets and airwaves. For example, all of the five principal newspapers increased sales dramatically (between 56% and 89%) after the Moro kidnapping (Lumley and Schlesinger, 1982, pl. 603). 272 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 273 coverage reinforced the terrorist strategy by focusing the cause (or blame) for the In addition to this obvious effect, the symbiotic relationship between the print crisis on US governmental institutions and by suggesting that military action was and nonprint media on the one hand and militant groups on the other warrants necessary to reestablish institutional control. Furthermore, she finds that the further analysis. With respect to the Moro case, what is the evidence that the “rhetorical impact of terrorism” is mainly a function of others’ responses establishment-oriented Italian press unwittingly contributed to the BR’s success? (particularly the media) to terrorist activity. A peincipal problem of regions under To what extent was the BR media-wise in handling the Italian communications terrorist attack is how to maintain both control and one’s status as a victim of media in order to present their cause in a favorable light, thus pressuring govern- terrorism. Indeed, as she says, “the primary threat to governmental institutions is mental decision makers? not the lives lost in terrorist acts, but the questioning of governmental institutions” In the 1970s, the BR conceived of the press as an “instrument of war,” (Palmerton, 1988, p. 105). Lack of realistic and proportional perspective about the discounting media and party claims that they and other “red terrorists” were neo- terrorist danger or threat in media reports on terrorism helps to construct “a variety Fascist creations. They threatened: “To the psychological war we shall respond of meanings about terrorist events” and “those meanings may well serve the with psychological war and retaliation.” Spokesmen for the BR also said their main terrorist cause” (Palmerton, 1988, p. 117). aims in the Moro kidnapping were “prisoner exchange” and political recognition As for the mass media’s gains from terrorism, besides the “hot” news akin to a through the use of “armed propaganda.” Their objective was to prove that the day continuing soap opera/criminal film, what else does the publisher or broadcaster of proletarian deliverance was near at hand. To accomplish these aims, the BR had gain? Because the crime beat and reports of violence are part of the daily diet of all to follow the news canons previously described (i.e., conflict, timeliness, sym- media, it is no surprise that terrorism, hijacking, armed siege, political violence, bolism, recognition, maximum effect, escalation, and drama). The BR strategy was assassinations, and like crimes against the state and people are given widespread clearly dramatic in its initial use of violence and death and symbolic in its choice of publicity. In the case of terrorism, media have a virtual gold mine of news which a famous statesman and party leader, Aldo Moro. They attacked the state itself never dries up or pans out – it has universal appeal and a built-in demand for more since Moro, the former prime minister, was expected to be the new president of coverage up to and beyond the saturation point. Italy before year’s end. They maximized the goal of social and political recognition An interesting case in point is the Italian media’s treatment, coverage, and since, under Moro’s leadership, a historic and unifying compromise between the involvement with the state, the hostage, and the BR during the kidnapping and Christian Democratic, Socialist, and Communist parties seemed at hand. murder of Aldo Moro and five of his bodyguards in 1978. Since the Moro crisis Timeliness was also achieved since this “attack at the heart of the state” was in lasted nearly two months during the spring of 1978, the roles of all prominent conflict with the new national solidarity cabinet which was t be announced on the forces and actors in this bloody drama had a chance to be played out with the very day of the kidnapping. They also drastically challenged the entire democratic predictability of an ancient Roman coliseum scene. The saga was complete with system’s ability to handle its 38th postwar governmental crisis, thus achieving “Christians” (Moro and his martyred bodyguards), BR “lions,” state “Caesars,” maximum effect (Caserta, 1978, p. 101; Rosso, 1976, p. 282; Bocca, 1985, pp. 206, media “tribunes,” and the anxious Italian public, ever eager for more bread, 219; Payerhin, 1988, p. 61). circuses, and carnivals. Wagner-Pacifica (1987) has described the “Moro morality The BR was well known to the Italian media and readily recognized by the play” as a form of “social drama.” public. They fulfilled the black/white or good/bad values. Their past, present, and Ignoring for the moment the complex state, corporate, and party links of the future credibility (regarding the use of violence as a political instrument) was well Italian press and broadcast media, Italians’ media usage differs appreciably from established and maintained as the crisis escalated with additional shootings and that of northern European and other Western European publics. For example, murders. The BR regularly supplied enough news so that the Moro case remained regular newspaper purchases are among the lowest in Europe, particularly in the an international media event for nearly two months. Through their selection of a southern parts of the country. The media in Italy are also strong on debate, rhetoric, prime target (Moro) in a prominent place (Rome), with a well-planned, bloody, and conflict, journalistic competition, and sordid exhibitions, particularly reports on efficient initial event (kidnap and murder), the BR effectively achieved maximum widespread crime and violence. There is a minimum level of confirmed sources, effect and set the news agenda in Italy for 55 days. Even in their choice of site, the careful investigation, analysis of causes, background context, and socially BR wanted to avoid civilian casualties so that, as a spokesperson said, “we productive reporting. One fact is clear, however: the public’s attention to the media absolutely did not want the action to present any terrorist characteristics; we skyrocketed once the Moro case hit the streets and airwaves. For example, all of the wanted to be clear that it was a military action directed against the state and its high five principal newspapers increased sales dramatically (between 56% and 89%) representative” (Bocca, 1985, p. 208; Payerhin, 1988, p. 67). Even the choice of after the Moro kidnapping (Lumley and Schlesinger, 1982, pl. 603). killing on the spot or abducting Moro had its intended media impact, since a 274 Russell F. Farnen political martyr was worth far less press coverage than a captive hero pleading for his life. The technique of regularly issuing communiques and letters from Moro to the press through intermediaries kept the event on the public agenda every day. Secrecy about the captive’s location also added to the mystery, as did the media being called to retrieve secret documents hidden in seven major Italian cities. Most of the releases were announced simultaneously the day before prime news days. Since the messages were long, the papers had no choice but to print only “hot” news, leaving analysis until later. This split-second timing and planned releases of Moro’s messages also served to heighten conflict and to break the society wide open. This escalation increased even more when Moro realized that the party and the press intended not to deal with the BR. This ensured both his eventual death and subsequent martyrdom. His trial and conviction in a BR kangaroo court, photographs holding a newspaper to prove his vitality, and even the symbolic placement of his dead body in the center of Rome, on a street linking the two major party headquarters, all had mediagenic and symbolic meaning to the BR and the public. All of these events were carefully planned and implemented to achieve maximum effect on the media, public, and government. Throughout the Moro crisis, the BR continued to gain standing and legitimacy through the media from a variety of quarters, including the Vatican and the United Nations. Pope Paul VI personally begged the BR to release Moro. Kurt Waldheim, then United Nations secretary general, referred to the BR “cause,” a term which infuriated the Italian government and required Waldheim to issue an apology for a “translation error” (Sciascia, 1978, p. 144; Payerhin, 1988, p. 75). The BR held the entire Italian Republic hostage through its media campaign and psychological warfare. During this debacle, they influenced public opinion through their managed news releases, interactions with the media, and other techniques and strategies which gained them adherents, followers, and supporters, while neutralizing much of their opposition. They accomplished these feats with the mass media’s and the state’s unwilling assistance. For its part, Italian media coverage of the Moro tragedy followed its familiar formats (i.e., publishing accounts from various sources in a hurried fashion without the benefit of context or analysis). For example, the media offered the public neither explanations for these violent acts nor any theories about terrorism, its meaning, sources, objectives, or variants (Lumley and Schlesinger, 1982, pp. 607, 624). The Moro affair was treated much like an inexplicable natural disaster or an act of God – much like a volcanic eruption, an earthquake, or a sudden, violent storm (Silj, 1978, p. 215; Payerhin, 1988, p. 75). The media treated the Moro event like a two-month soccer game in which each of the two teams (the press/state versus the BR) used different rulebooks, though they shared the same playing field. Immediacy, undigested news, daily coverage, and inflamed rhetoric were the order of the day. As one critic noted, the tendency was to report “immediately and with 274 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 275 political martyr was worth far less press coverage than a captive hero pleading for the most details possible, even if fabricated . . . just to exhibit their own his life. professionalism” (Bechelloni, 1978, p. 225; Payerhin, 1988, p. 78). The technique of regularly issuing communiques and letters from Moro to the Though little state pressure and no prior restraint were exerted from Rome, the press through intermediaries kept the event on the public agenda every day. media practiced self-censorship. From the start, the common position of the Secrecy about the captive’s location also added to the mystery, as did the media government and the Christian Democrats was maintained. Only this perspective, being called to retrieve secret documents hidden in seven major Italian cities. Most one of “no negotiations,” was maintained without any consideration of alternatives. of the releases were announced simultaneously the day before prime news days. The attack was denounced and the other victims’ funerals covered, but the fate of Since the messages were long, the papers had no choice but to print only “hot” Moro remained the true focus of attention. Paper after paper wrote of preserving his news, leaving analysis until later. This split-second timing and planned releases of life, were it not for the overriding needs to resist “blackmail,” to respect the “law,” Moro’s messages also served to heighten conflict and to break the society wide and to avoid making deals with terrorists. open. This escalation increased even more when Moro realized that the party and While Moro was made a hero even before his death, the press tried to prepare the press intended not to deal with the BR. This ensured both his eventual death the public for the inevitable. They actually began a public mourning period for him and subsequent martyrdom. His trial and conviction in a BR kangaroo court, while he was still alive. Even the validity of Moro’s pathetic letters was debated, photographs holding a newspaper to prove his vitality, and even the symbolic since according to Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti, the views expressed were not placement of his dead body in the center of Rome, on a street linking the two major morally ascribable to him. Appeals for Moro’s life, his family’s pleas for party headquarters, all had mediagenic and symbolic meaning to the BR and the negotiations, and other cries for mercy went largely unheard. The media stood public. All of these events were carefully planned and implemented to achieve steadfast behind the government’s hard line of no negotiating. The news media maximum effect on the media, public, and government. published whatever the government distributed, without criticism or qualification, Throughout the Moro crisis, the BR continued to gain standing and legitimacy just as it did with BR demands and reports. The story line that emerged linked the through the media from a variety of quarters, including the Vatican and the United future of Italian democracy with maintaining law and order through governmental Nations. Pope Paul VI personally begged the BR to release Moro. Kurt Waldheim, intransigence. Workers’ strikes and demonstrations in the factories were taken as then United Nations secretary general, referred to the BR “cause,” a term which symbols of popular support for the government, though management was behind infuriated the Italian government and required Waldheim to issue an apology for a some of them. Newspapers also took this opportunity to attack one another with “translation error” (Sciascia, 1978, p. 144; Payerhin, 1988, p. 75). The BR held the accusations of support or sympathy for the BR cause. False interviews were also entire Italian Republic hostage through its media campaign and psychological published to support such allegations. Other themes of unity, stability, public warfare. During this debacle, they influenced public opinion through their managed support, consensus, and maintaining democracy were also used symbolically news releases, interactions with the media, and other techniques and strategies throughout the period (Silj, 1978, pp. 45, 50, 65, 80, 93, 97, 117, 211, 231; Lumley which gained them adherents, followers, and supporters, while neutralizing much and Schlesinger, 1982, pp. 609, 613, 619; Payerhin, 1988, p. 75). of their opposition. They accomplished these feats with the mass media’s and the Front page coverage, banner headlines, photographs, and large amounts of state’s unwilling assistance. space were devoted to the continuing coverage of the Moro incident. In three For its part, Italian media coverage of the Moro tragedy followed its familiar papers, the entire front page was regularly used for this purpose. Practically all formats (i.e., publishing accounts from various sources in a hurried fashion without other political, cultural, and foreign news was blacked out. On selected days, from the benefit of context or analysis). For example, the media offered the public one-quarter to one-half the news (average 37%) was devoted to this story. This neither explanations for these violent acts nor any theories about terrorism, its emphasis was so great and so unusual that it, too, became a general subject of meaning, sources, objectives, or variants (Lumley and Schlesinger, 1982, pp. 607, concern in media debates. This situation produced a curious logical impasse. That 624). The Moro affair was treated much like an inexplicable natural disaster or an is, the media regularly assured its readers the BR could not paralyze the state, yet act of God – much like a volcanic eruption, an earthquake, or a sudden, violent the media coverage seemed to convince the public that all other public business storm (Silj, 1978, p. 215; Payerhin, 1988, p. 75). The media treated the Moro event was at a standstill (Silj, 1978, p. 49; Payerhin, 1988, p. 86). like a two-month soccer game in which each of the two teams (the press/state Foreign media treatment of the Moro case was a microcosm of Italian press versus the BR) used different rulebooks, though they shared the same playing field. coverage. Themes in the foreign press denounced the “terrorists”’ the small number Immediacy, undigested news, daily coverage, and inflamed rhetoric were the order of “criminals” responsible; and the “ruthless” band of “psychopaths,” “professional of the day. As one critic noted, the tendency was to report “immediately and with killers” and “murders,” “fanatics,” and “savages.” They were also branded as 276 Russell F. Farnen “Marxist urban guerrillas” and “Marxist revolutionaries,” seeking to throw the country into a civil war (Davies and Walton, 1983, p. 40). These opinions were primarily based on official government sources, had few terrorist sources, and did not mention any public support or underlying causes for the BR actions. The use of quotation marks surrounding the name Red Brigades and phrases such as so-called of self-styled BR appeared frequently, particularly early on in the drama. The international media (excluding Pravda) also gave the story regular, prominent, and front page coverage. The treatment of the BR in US, Western and Eastern news media (e.g., New York Times, Washington Post, Manchester Guardian, Tribuna Ludu [Warsaw, Poland], CBS, NBC, BBC, ZDF, ARD, etc.) never analyzed the complexities of international, revolutionary violence. The media preferred to reduce the story to an irrational act – without meaning, cause, ore explanation. Davies and Walton’s analysis noted: . . . a pattern of description which is not simply biased in favor of parliamentary democracy as one would expect, but which strongly prefers certain parties, positions and ideologies over others which legitimately inhabit the legislative sphere both in and outside the parliament. The visual and verbal content of the Moro news story tells more about the maintenance of an ideologically safe version of consensus by media demarcation than it does about the “events” which constitute the news (Davies and Walton, 1983, p. 48). The Moro kidnapping has also been analyzed from a mythical perspective. Moro’s martyrdom achieved social consensus. This event symbolized an end to social division through the historic compromise (Davies and Walton, 1983, p. 8). This sort of dramatic analysis can also be applied to other violent incidents such as the October 1985 Achille Lauro hijacking when the sole victim, his wife, and family were eulogized for two weeks in the New York Times until he became a hero and a symbol of all that was good in America. This later justified the US diversion (hijacking) of the four terrorists on an Egyptian airliner to a NATO landing strip in Italy. The following year, the US responded to the Berlin disco bombing, in which several US military personnel were killed and injured, by bombing Libya to punish Qaddafi for his allege involvement. This “take a life, bomb a city” response completely lacked proportionality. However, the press and public voiced little opposition to this raid which the UK assisted and France rejected, in terms of permission to overfly sovereign territory (Lule, 1988, pp. 1- 15). The Systemic Relationship Between Terrorism and the Media All forms of terrorism cannot be defined or described simply, nor can their relationships to different news media and governments be generalized. Never- theless, it is possible to capture some of their essential relationships using a schematic diagram. Figure 1 lays out some of the key elements in this dynamic 276 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 277 “Marxist urban guerrillas” and “Marxist revolutionaries,” seeking to throw the interactive relationship among terrorist groups, the media, terrorism, public country into a civil war (Davies and Walton, 1983, p. 40). These opinions were opinion, and public policy decisions. A democratic political system, in which a primarily based on official government sources, had few terrorist sources, and did relatively free and unfettered press normally functions, is hypothesized. The key not mention any public support or underlying causes for the BR actions. The use of terms used in the diagram are as follows: quotation marks surrounding the name Red Brigades and phrases such as so-called 1. Terrorist Groups have various objectives and take different actions, all involving of self-styled BR appeared frequently, particularly early on in the drama. The violence of the threat of violence. Most objectives are global, vague, changing, international media (excluding Pravda) also gave the story regular, prominent, and and ideologically rooted. front page coverage. The treatment of the BR in US, Western and Eastern news 2. Mass Media include national and international radio, television, newspapers, media (e.g., New York Times, Washington Post, Manchester Guardian, Tribuna magazines, and other print and nonprint news media which set the public’s Ludu [Warsaw, Poland], CBS, NBC, BBC, ZDF, ARD, etc.) never analyzed the agenda. Media coverage may be exhaustive or minimal, firsthand or secondary, complexities of international, revolutionary violence. The media preferred to dramatic, and violence-prone, with no attempt to analyze underlying group reduce the story to an irrational act – without meaning, cause, ore explanation. motives or social causes. Media magnify, distort, and oversimplify through use Davies and Walton’s analysis noted: of value-laden, establishment-based stereotypes, usually obtained from govern- . . . a pattern of description which is not simply biased in favor of parliamentary mental sources. democracy as one would expect, but which strongly prefers certain parties, positions and 3. Terrorism is a larger-than-life product of media treatment. The result is a ideologies over others which legitimately inhabit the legislative sphere both in and concept, affect, and throughput, which bears little resemblance to the much outside the parliament. smaller, insignificant group which initiated the threatened violence. The visual and verbal content of the Moro news story tells more about the maintenance 4. Public Opinion is the national and international set of values, opinions, attitudes, of an ideologically safe version of consensus by media demarcation than it does about feelings, and concepts/cognitions on which the public bases its supports and the “events” which constitute the news (Davies and Walton, 1983, p. 48). demands for given public policies or preferred state action. The Moro kidnapping has also been analyzed from a mythical perspective. 5. State Action and Public Policies in part rely on media information, public Moro’s martyrdom achieved social consensus. This event symbolized an end to opinions (usually vague and uninformed), establishment goals, and independent social division through the historic compromise (Davies and Walton, 1983, p. 8). information. All terrorist activity is automatically branded unlawful, unjust, and This sort of dramatic analysis can also be applied to other violent incidents such as nonnegotiable. But the response thereto varies with the importance of victims, the October 1985 Achille Lauro hijacking when the sole victim, his wife, and the options available, and the accessibility of the terrorist group for the family were eulogized for two weeks in the New York Times until he became a imposition of sanctions. Negotiations, as a first step, and use of violent hero and a symbol of all that was good in America. This later justified the US interdiction as a last step in the process, are more routine today than in the early diversion (hijacking) of the four terrorists on an Egyptian airliner to a NATO 1970s. The public policy on media coverage, laws nationalizing the media (as in landing strip in Italy. The following year, the US responded to the Berlin disco a military alert), or regulations governing allowable media activity are made bombing, in which several US military personnel were killed and injured, by under the umbrellas of “national security” or ensuring “law and order.” There is bombing Libya to punish Qaddafi for his allege involvement. This “take a life, an underlying supposition that the normally establishment-oriented media are bomb a city” response completely lacked proportionality. However, the press and difficult to control, predict, or manage in such situations. Therefore, media are public voiced little opposition to this raid which the UK assisted and France potentially more threatening to regime maintenance, perhaps even more so than rejected, in terms of permission to overfly sovereign territory (Lule, 1988, pp. 1- the terrorist activity itself. 15). 6. Political Environment consists of the political culture and history, the normal level of order, violence, press freedom, or democracy in the society. Also of the The Systemic Relationship Between Terrorism and the Media influence are other governments and international organizations, as well as the international media network. All forms of terrorism cannot be defined or described simply, nor can their relationships to different news media and governments be generalized. Never- theless, it is possible to capture some of their essential relationships using a schematic diagram. Figure 1 lays out some of the key elements in this dynamic 278 Russell F. Farnen Figure 1: Terrorism and the mass media: an interactive system A useful construct for the analysis of the relationship between terrorism and mass media is deviance amplification. This process, as it applied to drug use, was described in the work of Leslie Wilkins and Jock Young in 1965 and 1973, respectively. Their work depicts a “deviancy amplification spiral,” whereby society defines a group as deviant and isolates their members. The ensuing group alienation results in increased deviancy and increased social reaction resulting in more deviancy, more isolation, and further escalation of the initial so-called abnormality. The dynamics of the interactions between the agencies of social control and the deviant group are also influenced through information provided by the mass media. This information is on drug uses, the police, the extent of public indignation, possible societal responses, and statistics on drug abuses. The whole “fantasy stereotype” of the drug taker is a media fabrication which, while untrue early in the process, assumes greater reality as the self-fulfilling prophecy about the drug culture increases. The result is increased isolation, more secrecy, ossification of values, greater group cohesion, more professional distribution of drugs, and increased public demands for solutions and social control (Cohen and Young, 1973, p. 350). Much the same process occurs with respect to the interaction between media and terrorist groups in the nature of terrorism has been greatly changed with the help of the mass media (see Figure 1). Reports from a given terrorist group with its peculiar or unique aims and style of violence are picked up as news by the ever- 278 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 279 watchful media after coverage of a violent incident or release of a group’s claim of responsibility for an act. The mass media lens or filter then starts the magnification process, using terms and negative imagery, such as disorder, violence, threat, irrationality, secret society, ruthless criminals, fanatics, etc., which produces a new and larger social phenomenon labeled terrorism. The term terrorism has certain encoded meanings, for example, civil war, guerrilla actions, widespread violence, crisis, proletarian uprising, Marxist revolu- tionaries, irrationality, siege, rebellion, and extremism, with highly negative valence. Terrorism then has an impact on public opinion about the terrorist group, its motives, its causes or objectives, government’s alternatives, media reports, treatment of terrorists, victims, handling of new threats and demands, negotiations process, and surrender. But the public does not take the raw news as gospel. Instead, people filter, compress, and interpret the news through the two step flow of communi- cations/”opinion influencers” and conceptual frames of reference (filters). This is the sum total of previous memories, information, and attitudes about such political events as terrorist attacks, governmental corruption, trust and cynicism, and good and bad politicians. Some of the resulting impressions are either neutralized and inhibited or blocked, while others are scattered or dispersed, like light through a Figure 1: Terrorism and the mass media: an interactive system prism. Still others become more closely focused on political decision makers in terms of supports or demands, much as light passes through a convex lens. A useful construct for the analysis of the relationship between terrorism and The process finally results in official short- and long-term actions or public mass media is deviance amplification. This process, as it applied to drug use, was policies. These include meeting demands, mounting rescue operations, antiter- described in the work of Leslie Wilkins and Jock Young in 1965 and 1973, rorists/media controls of guidelines for coverage, negotiation, stonewalling, news respectively. Their work depicts a “deviancy amplification spiral,” whereby society releases, etc. These are the result of information, media reports, public opinion, defines a group as deviant and isolates their members. The ensuing group alienation input from other governments, and previous public policy positions on terrorism. results in increased deviancy and increased social reaction resulting in more These events can occur over long or short periods of time, the Moro and Iran deviancy, more isolation, and further escalation of the initial so-called abnormality. cases being examples of long duration events, and the Achille Lauro, Munich The dynamics of the interactions between the agencies of social control and the Olympics, and TWA Flight 847, short. They also occur within a political deviant group are also influenced through information provided by the mass media. environment which has its own levels of order, violence, or limits on legally This information is on drug uses, the police, the extent of public indignation, permissible behavior. For example, the level of normal or acceptable violence may possible societal responses, and statistics on drug abuses. The whole “fantasy vary from that seen in relatively more violent societies, such as the US, Lebanon, stereotype” of the drug taker is a media fabrication which, while untrue early in the and Italy, or on the high seas, where international law carries the threat of certain process, assumes greater reality as the self-fulfilling prophecy about the drug moral sanctions. In other settings, where an international band of terrorists may culture increases. The result is increased isolation, more secrecy, ossification of victimize the nations of one country on the soil of a third, neutral, biased, or values, greater group cohesion, more professional distribution of drugs, and friendly country, the legal restrictions, governing laws, or permissible level of increased public demands for solutions and social control (Cohen and Young, 1973, violence also condition the environmental context in which the event occurs or is p. 350). played out. Much the same process occurs with respect to the interaction between media The political climate or culture of a country may help to explain public policies and terrorist groups in the nature of terrorism has been greatly changed with the taken to resolve a given terrorist incident. For example, in Italy in 1978, violence in help of the mass media (see Figure 1). Reports from a given terrorist group with its the streets challenged the political system on a daily basis. Italy was also about to peculiar or unique aims and style of violence are picked up as news by the ever- witness the “historic compromise” of a parliamentary alliance among Progressive 280 Russell F. Farnen Christian Democrats, Socialists, and the Italian Communist party. Worker protests, high unemployment, and youth demonstrations also reflected or promoted anti- governmental cynicism and popular alienation. Within this political culture, Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti voiced the intransigent government position of no negotiations and no concessions to BR terrorists, under any conditions. The Italian and international press maintained and supported the government’s stand. It naturally and inevitably resulted in doom for Aldo Moro, Italy’s own state of civil disorder and parliamentary chaos on the eve of the “historic compromise” was a critical factor in shaping the way in which the government and the news media handled the Moro crisis, the terrorists, and the story over a 55-day period. Within this political environment (characterized by the terrorist/news media/govern- ment/public opinion nexus), elements of the system interacted and fed back to one another in a dynamic fashion. That is, the BR carefully orchestrated its violence and its press releases. The government remained adamant, while selectively releas- ing inflammatory and self-serving news to the press. The news media repeatedly played up the themes of law and order, democracy hanging in the balance, no compromise, and the willing sacrifice of Moro for the public good against the BR’s unfounded and irrational demands, which were not to be met under any circumstances. The press, however, had an unexpected effect on public opinion. The news audience soon realized just how feeble a threat the BR posed to the supposedly unstable and fragile political system. The public also began to identify with the BR cause against the corrupt, unstable, and unpopular Roman regime. The news media, unexpectedly and purposely, helped to bring about this viewpoint. They convinced the people of the BR’s public importance, and thereby helped to legitimize their claims and antigovernment posturing, if not their violent methods. By upholding the official party line and by not examining the underlying societal links and causes of the BR phenomenon, the news analysts failed in their task to inform the public. The media were satisfied with entertaining the masses with one new spectacular event after another. Though they tried to delegitimize the BR (along with all terrorists), the media did not succeed in their mission. Preventing this were deeply rooted social divisions endemic to the Italian political system, culture, and environment. Though the establishment line was harshly antiterrorist, the stereotyped and sensationalist treatment of the BR did not endure in the public’s consciousness. Instead, the BR was transformed into an Italian Robin Hood band, an impression which no amount of negative press could dispel. This result should give pause to those considering the effects on public opinion of news coverage of terrorism. It seems that strongly held preexistent views provide a barrier against media penetration. When the public has a negative view of the political system, the regime, and its power brokers, any news story may not easily be able to change these perspectives. This amounts to the public having a news cosmology or ideology that it also uses a filter (or concave lens) through which 280 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 281 Christian Democrats, Socialists, and the Italian Communist party. Worker protests, citizens can reduce an exaggerated account into more simple pro- or anti- high unemployment, and youth demonstrations also reflected or promoted anti- government, regime, or system evaluations. This exists at a much more simplified, governmental cynicism and popular alienation. Within this political culture, Prime basic, or gut level, based on preexistent political predispositions, perceptions, Minister Giulio Andreotti voiced the intransigent government position of no feelings, attitudes, and cognitions. Therefore, the desire of the government or media negotiations and no concessions to BR terrorists, under any conditions. The Italian for public support of a predetermined public policy stance may not be forthcoming and international press maintained and supported the government’s stand. It in the face of a solidified, unified, and clear expression of popular opinion. This naturally and inevitably resulted in doom for Aldo Moro, Italy’s own state of civil situation, which sometimes may allow the government to carry out an unpopular disorder and parliamentary chaos on the eve of the “historic compromise” was a policy without public hindrance or objection, may not always be transferrable to critical factor in shaping the way in which the government and the news media another, later, or similar incident. It may not result in renewed public support for handled the Moro crisis, the terrorists, and the story over a 55-day period. Within the regime, system, or office holders. What a different governmental or mass media this political environment (characterized by the terrorist/news media/govern- approach would yield remains to be seen. There is seldom, in any country (with the ment/public opinion nexus), elements of the system interacted and fed back to one possible exception of Great Britain), a concern for an in-depth media analysis of another in a dynamic fashion. That is, the BR carefully orchestrated its violence causes, motives, social conditions, or alternative contexts (or lenses, in this and its press releases. The government remained adamant, while selectively releas- illustration) for interpreting news about terrorist acts. Meanwhile, the public ing inflammatory and self-serving news to the press. The news media repeatedly remains mystified about the roots, manifestations, and solutions to terrorism (e.g., played up the themes of law and order, democracy hanging in the balance, no is more or less democracy necessary?) and puts such incidents in the category of compromise, and the willing sacrifice of Moro for the public good against the BR’s the “wrath of nature,” much like an act of God or a freak of nature – here today, unfounded and irrational demands, which were not to be met under any gone tomorrow – lacking any rhyme or reason. circumstances. Statistics on both international and US domestic terrorism indicate a decided The press, however, had an unexpected effect on public opinion. The news decline during the 1980s as compared with the number of incidents in the 1970s. In audience soon realized just how feeble a threat the BR posed to the supposedly 1978, for example, out of 2725 international incidents reported, 60 were attributed unstable and fragile political system. The public also began to identify with the BR to the BR, with 16 deaths in Italy. During this decade, the total number of such cause against the corrupt, unstable, and unpopular Roman regime. The news media, incidents has varied from 600 to 800 per year, with about 150 aimed at US unexpectedly and purposely, helped to bring about this viewpoint. They convinced nationals or American targets. Domestically, in 1985, for example, there were only the people of the BR’s public importance, and thereby helped to legitimize their ten actual incidents (as contrasted with 112 in 1977) due to a changed political claims and antigovernment posturing, if not their violent methods. By upholding climate, better airport security, counterterrorist activities, and more frequently the official party line and by not examining the underlying societal links and causes thwarted attempts (e.g., 23 preventions in 1985). Though fewer in number, there is of the BR phenomenon, the news analysts failed in their task to inform the public. also a commensurate increase in the symbolic significance afforded attacks, such as The media were satisfied with entertaining the masses with one new spectacular the execution of Col. W. R. Higgins, the Terry Anderson kidnapping, the Achille event after another. Though they tried to delegitimize the BR (along with all Lauro/Klinghoffer incident, the TWA 847 hijacking, and the Berlin disco and TWA terrorists), the media did not succeed in their mission. Preventing this were deeply Lockerbee bombings. Each such incident has been associated with real or imagined rooted social divisions endemic to the Italian political system, culture, and American links to Israel, the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, Lebanon, or other environment. Though the establishment line was harshly antiterrorist, the Middle Eastern problems (Genovese, 1988, p. 143). stereotyped and sensationalist treatment of the BR did not endure in the public’s In Gerbner’s (March 1988, p. 1; July 1988, p. 1) discussion of symbolism, consciousness. Instead, the BR was transformed into an Italian Robin Hood band, violence, and terror, he maintains that such “symbolic uses benefit those who an impression which no amount of negative press could dispel. control them: they are usually states and media establishments, not small-scale or This result should give pause to those considering the effects on public opinion isolated actors or insurgents.” Gerbner also observes: of news coverage of terrorism. It seems that strongly held preexistent views provide a barrier against media penetration. When the public has a negative view of the . . . though perpetrators of small-scale acts of violence and terror may occasionally force political system, the regime, and its power brokers, any news story may not easily media attention and . . . seem to advance their cause, . . . such a challenge seems to en-hance media credibility . . . and is used to mobilize support for repression often in the be able to change these perspectives. This amounts to the public having a news form of wholesale state violence and terror or military action, presented as justified by cosmology or ideology that it also uses a filter (or concave lens) through which provocation (Gerbner, July 1988, p. 1). 282 Russell F. Farnen Prime television is also a man’s world where the power wielders control the symbols and victimize vulnerable women, the young, old, and minorities. The regular and disproportionate appearance of criminals, law enforcers, the violent, and murders bears little relationship to everyday reality; yet it accustoms us to the symbolic structures of social power. Gerbner believes such media violence “cultivates a differential sense of vulnerability and stigmatization, placing heavier burdens on selected minorities and nationalities” (Gerbner, July 1988, p. 1). John Newhouse’s recent article on intelligence gathering and terrorism is an excellent summary of the international state of the art (or the lack thereof), in meeting terrorist threats, and in solving past mysteries about responsibility for violent and unexplained aircraft disasters. A fine piece of detective reporting, the article also lays out the human technological problems associated with curbing terrorist attacks against civilian aircraft. As Newhouse sees it, the problem is much larger than either the human or technological solutions proposed. For example, JFK airport issued 47,000 passes and Heathrow in London issued 38,000 passes onto the tarmac. The new thermal neutron analysis (TNA) machine for detecting plastic explosives is not only very expensive, bulky, and as yet unavailable, but also is not very fast. For example, it would take at least two hours to screen a fully loaded 747 jumbo jet. Since Pan Am alone has over 30 scheduled departures each day and 400 trans-Atlantic crossings per week, screening all luggage is unthinkable. With false alarms sure to slow down the system and with the inevitable resort to selective screening based on secret potential terrorist profiles, the increased measure of psychological security resulting from a new system will only last until a piece of lethal luggage slips by the underpaid and often harried airline employees (Newhouse, 1989, p. 71). What is more interesting is that at the end of his account, Newhouse reverts to a larger policy point by saying: Terrorism feeds on the bitterness and frustration of people for whom the future seems to offer nothing, and in the attention paid to acts of violence by more of us who feel threatened by them. Another dynamic – such as a credible peace process in the Middle East – might upstage and gradually neutralize terrorism (Newhouse, 1989, p. 82). It is interesting to note that other than passenger inconvenience, Newhouse saw no problems with the technological and human solutions proposed by airline and government officials. The reality is that one intrusive technological fix will undoubtedly lead to another, each more invasive of privacy than the last. Indeed, the real threat of terrorism is that its control will lead to a variety of new, repressive measures. This becomes more likely as research findings increasingly point to the success of repressive regimes in reducing terrorism in contrast to the fewer successes of open, democratic societies. There are also international proposals to combat terrorism. For example, in December 1985, a UN General Assembly resolution appealed to member states to join existing international conventions on terrorism. The UN also asked members 282 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 283 Prime television is also a man’s world where the power wielders control the to act domestically against the problem, to work cooperatively with other member symbols and victimize vulnerable women, the young, old, and minorities. The states and the International Civil Aviation Organization to establish new measures regular and disproportionate appearance of criminals, law enforcers, the violent, for law enforcement, and to take collective action against political terrorists killing and murders bears little relationship to everyday reality; yet it accustoms us to the innocent civilians, and taking them hostage. While recognizing that some terrorist symbolic structures of social power. Gerbner believes such media violence groups are part of liberation or freedom fighting movements, General I. J. Rikhye “cultivates a differential sense of vulnerability and stigmatization, placing heavier of the International Peace Academy says others engage in sheer violence, burdens on selected minorities and nationalities” (Gerbner, July 1988, p. 1). seemingly for publicity or just for its own sake. Rikhye acknowledges that the John Newhouse’s recent article on intelligence gathering and terrorism is an complexities of the problem lead to simultaneous branding and counternaming pro- excellent summary of the international state of the art (or the lack thereof), in and anti-PLO and Israeli groups in the media as terrorists and linking states (such meeting terrorist threats, and in solving past mysteries about responsibility for as Libya, Iraq, and Syria) to alleged sponsorship of violent groups they have violent and unexplained aircraft disasters. A fine piece of detective reporting, the harbored in the past. He also believes that both terrorism and military action against article also lays out the human technological problems associated with curbing terrorism are equally ineffective, citing international publicity as the only gain of terrorist attacks against civilian aircraft. As Newhouse sees it, the problem is much the first and the example of Egyptian commandos in Malta as illustrative of the larger than either the human or technological solutions proposed. For example, JFK second (Rikhye, 1989). airport issued 47,000 passes and Heathrow in London issued 38,000 passes onto the While maintaining these views, Rikhye once again proposes the need for more tarmac. The new thermal neutron analysis (TNA) machine for detecting plastic military cooperation to combat terrorism, namely, “an elite international peace- explosives is not only very expensive, bulky, and as yet unavailable, but also is not keeping unit, highly skilled in hostage rescue, to undertake this responsibility.” He very fast. For example, it would take at least two hours to screen a fully loaded 747 also proposes extension of the US-USSR 1985 informal agreement which ensures jumbo jet. Since Pan Am alone has over 30 scheduled departures each day and 400 shared information on chemical and nuclear terrorist activities. An agency along trans-Atlantic crossings per week, screening all luggage is unthinkable. With false the lines of the UN Disaster Relieve Organization could also be established to pool alarms sure to slow down the system and with the inevitable resort to selective information on potential terrorist activities and arrests for international security screening based on secret potential terrorist profiles, the increased measure of purposes. Once again, however, these approaches are reactive, post hoc, and treat psychological security resulting from a new system will only last until a piece of the symptom, not the causes of terrorism as a public phenomenon and problem lethal luggage slips by the underpaid and often harried airline employees (Rikhye, 1989, pp. 20-22). Although information sharing and concerted diplomatic (Newhouse, 1989, p. 71). What is more interesting is that at the end of his account, responses may help to resolve a terrorist incident, it is unlikely that any kind of Newhouse reverts to a larger policy point by saying: international “SWAT” team would be able to accomplish much since the character of international terrorism changes daily. Terrorism feeds on the bitterness and frustration of people for whom the future seems to The issue of using military force to free hostages or to retaliate against state offer nothing, and in the attention paid to acts of violence by more of us who feel threatened by them. Another dynamic – such as a credible peace process in the Middle sponsors of terrorism was widely debated in the mid-1980s. Two different views East – might upstage and gradually neutralize terrorism (Newhouse, 1989, p. 82). were then expressed by the former Israeli ambassador to the UN, Benjamin Netanyahu and Martha Crenshaw, professor of government at Wesleyan Uni- It is interesting to note that other than passenger inconvenience, Newhouse saw versity. Both agreed on the fact that US nationals had increasingly been the focus no problems with the technological and human solutions proposed by airline and of international terrorist attacks from 1968 to 1985, providing one-third of these government officials. The reality is that one intrusive technological fix will victims during a time which saw a rise from 125 to 782 in the total annual numbers undoubtedly lead to another, each more invasive of privacy than the last. Indeed, of international terrorist incidents. Each was also concerned with the role of the the real threat of terrorism is that its control will lead to a variety of new, repressive media in a terrorist crisis (Netanyahu, 1986; Crenshaw, 1986). measures. This becomes more likely as research findings increasingly point to the Netanyahu’s position is that modern terrorism is both state-sponsored and success of repressive regimes in reducing terrorism in contrast to the fewer media-inspired. He maintains that unilateral military action (regardless of state successes of open, democratic societies. sovereignty claims) can deter terrorism, as Israel’s example has proven since the There are also international proposals to combat terrorism. For example, in dramatic Entebbe raid in 1976. The West fails in the war against terrorism because December 1985, a UN General Assembly resolution appealed to member states to of greed, political cowardice, and both moral and intellectual confusion about join existing international conventions on terrorism. The UN also asked members terrorists and terrorism, he says. Instead, a combination of political and military 284 Russell F. Farnen courage, and the will to take risks and to speak the truth (however painful) to valorous citizen-soldiers (who must be willing to sacrifice to ensure clarity of social purpose), are the civic virtues that will overcome the fear upon which terrorism depends. In response, Crenshaw believes that the nature of the terrorist threat changed in the 1980s. An action-reaction-escalation spiral changed the natures of the game. Terrorists now use safe harbor states, split up hostages, and practice suicide bombings. Against these acts, elite strike force teams are ineffective. Moreover, preventive and retaliatory measures must be practical and discriminate. We cannot randomly kill innocent civilians. But will deterrence work? Will the terrorists value calculus be influenced? Crenshaw believes not. We do not understand terrorists, their frames of reference, their motivations, or how they calculate risks. While states may be deterred, terrorist groups may not. As she says, in terrorist incidents, “the glare of publicity isolates and magnifies the consequences of miscalculation and accident.” Terrorism is time-, space-, and incident-bound; it is so differentiated that it will not respond uniformly to countervailing forces. Media must teach “the lesson of terrorism.” Ta]hat is that “even the most powerful states cannot hope to control their environments.” Since terrorism is so crisis-oriented, the media do not focus on the terrorist threat as part of the normal course of events in a disorderly world. The media hype accompanying an incident is followed inevitably by neglect and unpreparedness. This is “a pattern encouraged by the fickleness of media (especially television) attention,” which induces “complacency and a false sense of security.” Media attention not only distorts, but also glorifies violence; it fails to signify terrorism as a strategy not of warring armies, but of the weak. If this persists, it will result in the “most impressive achievement modern terrorism has claimed.” The final risk is that our response to terrorism will “transform it into the grand spectacle the terrorists sought all along and raise its practitioners to the status of mythic heroes or villains” (Crenshaw, 1986). Perhaps even more risky than such symbolic warfare are the prospects for the use of Israeli-styled repression against our own nationals and foreigners on airplanes, at the borders, and in the society at large. Violation of another nation’s sovereignty is an act of war and a serious legal lapse for a major world power. Violating citizens’ basic rights is not an acceptable alternative for the lead country in the Western alliance, priding itself on its moral, ethical, and humane values. Two researchers have interpreted the results of their elaborate empirical and statistical cross-national study of intracountry terrorism and the contagion effect in 16 countries from 1968 to 1978 as follows: Democratic, affluent, and well-educated states seem to have a particular difficulty in reversing terrorism, whereas autocratic, poor, and uneducated countries do not. 284 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 285 courage, and the will to take risks and to speak the truth (however painful) to . . . Our findings reinforce warning[s] that citizens and governments of open valorous citizen-soldiers (who must be willing to sacrifice to ensure clarity of societies must respond very carefully to terrorism in order to avoid cures that are either social purpose), are the civic virtues that will overcome the fear upon which ineffective, or worse than the disease (Hamilton and Hamilton, 1983, p. 52). terrorism depends. While Newhouse sees some hope in ameliorating the terrorist threat through In response, Crenshaw believes that the nature of the terrorist threat changed in technological and human solutions, Morrison (1986, p. 4) has little faith in a the 1980s. An action-reaction-escalation spiral changed the natures of the game. “technocratic consciousness” that would use information technology, replete with Terrorists now use safe harbor states, split up hostages, and practice suicide abundant “noise,” or an ABM/SDI defense mode, frequently plagued by “misses” bombings. Against these acts, elite strike force teams are ineffective. Moreover, and “false alarms,” to solve problems which stem from human aggression, conflict, preventive and retaliatory measures must be practical and discriminate. We cannot disputes, and grievances. In the end, such human surveillance fixes may be used in randomly kill innocent civilians. an Orwellian fashion to solve the terrorist problem should even a few climactic But will deterrence work? Will the terrorists value calculus be influenced? incidents validate the need. When repression and invasion of privacy arrive, in Crenshaw believes not. We do not understand terrorists, their frames of reference, addition to finding the few guilty criminal conspirators, human error will surely their motivations, or how they calculate risks. While states may be deterred, take its toll on the many innocent bystanders. Major US airlines are already terrorist groups may not. As she says, in terrorist incidents, “the glare of publicity collecting travelers’ passport numbers months in advance of overseas flights so isolates and magnifies the consequences of miscalculation and accident.” Terrorism they can run them through for computer checks. is time-, space-, and incident-bound; it is so differentiated that it will not respond Alternatively, Morrison sees that many of the world’s most pressing problems uniformly to countervailing forces. (e.g., species destruction, nuclear weapons, resource rape, and poverty) require Media must teach “the lesson of terrorism.” Ta]hat is that “even the most nontechnical and human analysis and solutions if they are to be ameliorated. We powerful states cannot hope to control their environments.” Since terrorism is so ignore at our peril the human causes of war, environmental destruction, and crisis-oriented, the media do not focus on the terrorist threat as part of the normal starvation. The Third World hungers not from a lack of land, seed, or contraception course of events in a disorderly world. The media hype accompanying an incident but rather from historical and continued “Western exploitation, intervention, and is followed inevitably by neglect and unpreparedness. This is “a pattern encouraged manipulation” (Morrison, 1986, p. 15). Technological solutions to these crises or by the fickleness of media (especially television) attention,” which induces the problem of terrorism will not work, but human efforts just might. As Morrison “complacency and a false sense of security.” Media attention not only distorts, but said, “Nevertheless, while human efforts (compromise, negotiation, intermediaries, also glorifies violence; it fails to signify terrorism as a strategy not of warring etc.) may indeed fail, they offer the real possibility of providing solutions.” And, he armies, but of the weak. If this persists, it will result in the “most impressive continued: achievement modern terrorism has claimed.” The final risk is that our response to terrorism will “transform it into the grand spectacle the terrorists sought all along The possibility remains therefore that components of the terrorist problem are resolvable and raise its practitioners to the status of mythic heroes or villains” (Crenshaw, through continuing human efforts at resolution. But based on the evidence that has been 1986). Perhaps even more risky than such symbolic warfare are the prospects for presented, the success of such efforts is compromised by the dominant technocratic the use of Israeli-styled repression against our own nationals and foreigners on consciousness and its reflexive reaching for familiar off-the-shelf solutions (Morrison, 1986, p. 14). airplanes, at the borders, and in the society at large. Violation of another nation’s sovereignty is an act of war and a serious legal lapse for a major world power. Jimmy Carter’s credentials as one such mediator are longstanding and philo- Violating citizens’ basic rights is not an acceptable alternative for the lead country sophically based. They were substantiated in 1979 with agreement on the Camp in the Western alliance, priding itself on its moral, ethical, and humane values. David accords. They last to the present day in that he arranged for an Ethiopian Two researchers have interpreted the results of their elaborate empirical and peace conference at his Presidential Center in Atlanta in September 1989. During statistical cross-national study of intracountry terrorism and the contagion effect in his administration, the Iran crisis proved to be nonnegotiable. In part, this was 16 countries from 1968 to 1978 as follows: because the political goal of the hostage release was timed to embarrass Carter and benefit Ronald Reagan at the start of his presidency. This might even be one of the Democratic, affluent, and well-educated states seem to have a particular difficulty in compelling reasons why Reagan later chose to do what he pledged never to do: reversing terrorism, whereas autocratic, poor, and uneducated countries do not. trade arms from the “Great Satan” nation for US hostages. 286 Russell F. Farnen In Carter’s case, every solution for the Iran crisis was considered (as was his usual style), including an ill-fated rescue attempt and an eleventh-hour proposal for a military invasion to save his presidency. The daily pressure CBS News anchorman Walter Cronkite, who repeated the countdown on the length of captivity each day, placed on the administration delivered Carter’s presidency into the hands of two elements: the Iranians and the American people. Both groups believed in Carter’s media-created impotence; each was determined to prove this self-fulfilling prophecy by retaining the hostages until Reagan’s inauguration day and by turning him out of office, respectively. The passion for diplomacy which Carter evidenced at Camp David and in the Panama Treaty accords did not always bear fruit, as his Salt II Treaty failure proved. However, the US news media, as much as the Iranian mullahs, were behaving irresponsibly when they depicted Carter as a failed leader. Their demands for action in this media-generated crisis, when no action save a bloody war was possible in the face of an intractable Iranian theocracy, cannot be termed responsible, however much it was “good television” of a “good story.” Despite Carter’s failure Martin and Walcott (1988) correctly conclude that a combination of diplomacy and law enforcement can best contain international terrorism. The imposition of an idealistic or pluralistic model of communications on the terrorism/government/media interrelationship will not yield a panacea. More public discourse or improved news reporting formats will not solve the problem of terrorism either as an issue, an event, or a policy question. Terrorism as a media event (along with drugs, alcohol, crime, or drunken driving) is related to the larger question of establishing proportionate media perspectives on national and international problems. One related issue is the media’s role in social control and the allocation of power, which Der Derian (1989, p. 158) calls “part of the hegemonic domination of given societies.” Another issue is the need for national security-obsessed states to begin using international diplomacy and new social programs to address root causes of terrorism, rather than resorting to knee-jerk military responses as the first – rather than the last – solution. Media self-censorship or governmental cooptation of the media are not reasonable policy alternatives in democratic societies. However, the belief in media determination as the root cause of the terrorist “theater of terror” assists central governments in their regular attempts at social control. But this is an inherently undemocratic, unnecessary, and ineffective policy. Since both media and governmental representatives control the language of rhetoric and discourse surrounding terrorism, an attempt on the part of both to differentiate between criminal and ideological terrorist acts would be a proper starting point. Each could clearly focus on the media-dominated objectives of terrorists; for example, as providing the context for explaining terrorists’ communication objectives to their fellow terrorists, the media, governments, public opinion, and others. The manipu- lation of the media through terrorist activities is also a topic that media and 286 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 287 In Carter’s case, every solution for the Iran crisis was considered (as was his governmental officials can elucidate during a crisis since the mass audiences usual style), including an ill-fated rescue attempt and an eleventh-hour proposal for become willing victims of terrorist propagandists, whose efforts usually succeed in a military invasion to save his presidency. The daily pressure CBS News enhancing their status and their cause (Weimann, 1983, pp. 38-45). anchorman Walter Cronkite, who repeated the countdown on the length of captivity Since presidents and prime ministers (as national spokespersons) help to frame each day, placed on the administration delivered Carter’s presidency into the hands the terrorist event, they can help to reduce panic, define the crisis, clarify roles (as of two elements: the Iranians and the American people. Both groups believed in victim or perpetrator), signify competence, and present nonmilitary options. When Carter’s media-created impotence; each was determined to prove this self-fulfilling an administration and the media treat terrorism as high drama, the mythmaking prophecy by retaining the hostages until Reagan’s inauguration day and by turning ability of the press is enhanced and military intervention, which is seldom actually him out of office, respectively. The passion for diplomacy which Carter evidenced used, is legitimated in a cops-and-robbers, good-guy or bad-guy scenario. Strangely at Camp David and in the Panama Treaty accords did not always bear fruit, as his enough, government and media leaders do not understand that, as Palmerton (1988, Salt II Treaty failure proved. However, the US news media, as much as the Iranian p. 107) says, “[i]t is the response which becomes the primary persuasive vehicle for mullahs, were behaving irresponsibly when they depicted Carter as a failed leader. the terrorist.” The terrorist, in other words, seeks the status of a victim, and Their demands for action in this media-generated crisis, when no action save a therefore, encourages repressive responses. Terrorists’ challenges to state authority bloody war was possible in the face of an intractable Iranian theocracy, cannot be encourage public support for subsequent state repression, violence, terror, or termed responsible, however much it was “good television” of a “good story.” military action. The media assist in legitimizing this state-sponsored counter- Despite Carter’s failure Martin and Walcott (1988) correctly conclude that a violence, and such justifications allow more authoritarian rule to secure a firmer combination of diplomacy and law enforcement can best contain international hold over the domestic society as well (Gerbner, 1988, p. 3). The process of terrorism. consent building, in which the media play a vital role, may produce a public which The imposition of an idealistic or pluralistic model of communications on the is not only amenable to suppression of terrorism at any cost, but is also willing to terrorism/government/media interrelationship will not yield a panacea. More public accept self-repression (Dobkin, November 1989, pp. 4, 10). discourse or improved news reporting formats will not solve the problem of The media create reality and, through their interpretive frames and social terrorism either as an issue, an event, or a policy question. Terrorism as a media conventions, teach readers and viewers not just what to think, but what to think event (along with drugs, alcohol, crime, or drunken driving) is related to the larger about. Media decision makers (publishers, editors, and directors) not only share the question of establishing proportionate media perspectives on national and dominant elite views toward public policy but also shape their reports in this international problems. One related issue is the media’s role in social control and context for public consumption. the allocation of power, which Der Derian (1989, p. 158) calls “part of the Democracy, pluralism, nationalism, social responsibility, and order are key hegemonic domination of given societies.” Another issue is the need for national themes which describe these “media frames” of reference. Such conventions have security-obsessed states to begin using international diplomacy and new social so distorted terrorism reportage on the networks that Middle Eastern terrorism is programs to address root causes of terrorism, rather than resorting to knee-jerk exaggerated, Latin American and anticorporate terrorism is minimized, and military responses as the first – rather than the last – solution. government victimization is espoused. According to one study of the 1969-1980 Media self-censorship or governmental cooptation of the media are not period,the actual pattern of world terrorism is different from that portrayed on the reasonable policy alternatives in democratic societies. However, the belief in media networks. When news broadcasts and stories are produced within these determination as the root cause of the terrorist “theater of terror” assists central institutionalized modes, they serve to create the so-called public character of governments in their regular attempts at social control. But this is an inherently events, a function shared with political officials and celebrities, who also share undemocratic, unnecessary, and ineffective policy. Since both media and responsibility for this agenda setting role. Since politicians rely on journalists and governmental representatives control the language of rhetoric and discourse vice versa for information, this symbiotic relationship is especially critical during a surrounding terrorism, an attempt on the part of both to differentiate between terrorist crisis when news may be managed and state power is no longer veiled. As criminal and ideological terrorist acts would be a proper starting point. Each could a vital part of this process of norm encoding and image creation, politicians also clearly focus on the media-dominated objectives of terrorists; for example, as label “good” and “bad” terrorists ans “enemies” or “freedom fighters” to produce providing the context for explaining terrorists’ communication objectives to their public support for national policies. When applied to terrorists, these labels short fellow terrorists, the media, governments, public opinion, and others. The manipu- circuit popular thinking and reduce the community’s opportunity to think about lation of the media through terrorist activities is also a topic that media and causes of injustice (Gerbner and Gerbner, July 1988, p. 1). 288 Russell F. Farnen David Altheide’s (1987, pp. 161, 174) US and UK cross-national analysis of television coverage of an IRA terrorist incident in 1982 indicates that the format of a news show also has an impact on the message an audience receives. That is, event-type formats focus on visuals and tactics, whereas topic-type formats (with interviews and documentaries) better deal with the purposes, goals, and basis for terrorism incidents. In other words, visuals are more restrictive than are contextual and documentary formats, which increase the chance for elite and audience reflection. Consequently, one clear signal of impending government repression is the higher likelihood of restriction of the latter format, which Britain has done with respect to IRA and the US with respect to Canadian and USSR documentaries. Government leaders prefer to use “one-liners” and event formats to inform the public, engineer consent, label, depersonalize, and delegitimize the “enemy,” and curry favor for governmental positions, however untenable. The increasingly common pictorial news headline format, which is “just good television,” helps to achieve these purposes. Cross-national surveys at the end of the 1970s indicated that most West Germans, British, and Americans believed terrorism was a very serious problem. Respondents wanted the death penalty for terrorists, sanctioned use of “special forces,” and accepted police state or extraordinary measures against them. They also accepted news embargoes and monitored conversations with lawyers during a terrorist crisis. Also of concern was being careful not to appear pro-terrorist. This meant opposing the death penalty, supporting legal aid, feeling pity, or believing some of the terrorist’s criticisms were unjustified (Gerbner and Gerbner, July 1988, p. 3). Despite these popular fears, Gerbner maintains the greatest threat is “collective, official, organized and legitimized violence.” Television violence and small-scale terrorist attacks are not as dangerous to social stability as are “illicit commerce, wars, unemployment, and other social trends that allow the wielders of power “to depersonalize enemies, to cultivate vulnerability and dependence in subordinates, to achieve instant support for swift and tough measures at home and abroad in what is presented as an exceedingly mean and scary world” (Gerbner and Gerbner, July 1988, p. 3). The government is one of the prime sources of emotional and pejorative descriptions of anti-state activities. Nevertheless, it is strange, indeed, that the FBI and State Department are often the prime movers behind media and public policies designed to ensure self-control or to mandate guidelines for media’s coverage after each such violent frenzy. Terrorists are such an embarrassment to the US State and Defense Departments that Secretaries George Shultz and Caspar Weinberger wanted nothing to do with the Iran-contra arms deal, which Poindexter and North managed out of the Reagan White House. In 1988, Shultz banned Arafat from attending the United Nations meeting in New York, forcing the General Assembly to meet in Geneva. His rationale was based on the PLO’s alleged terrorist links and nonrenunciation of terrorism. Arafat subsequently renounced terrorism, terrorist 288 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 289 David Altheide’s (1987, pp. 161, 174) US and UK cross-national analysis of organizations, and terrorist links to the eventual satisfaction of the Reagan television coverage of an IRA terrorist incident in 1982 indicates that the format of administration. Although the significance of these pronouncements in terms of a news show also has an impact on the message an audience receives. That is, public policy decisions involving the US, the PLO, and Israel (e.g., on resolving the event-type formats focus on visuals and tactics, whereas topic-type formats (with future of the West Bank) remains clouded, the fact that Bush administration interviews and documentaries) better deal with the purposes, goals, and basis for diplomats have met with PLO representatives and that the PLO has lately agreed to terrorism incidents. In other words, visuals are more restrictive than are contextual become part of the antiterrorist network holds promise for more agreements in the and documentary formats, which increase the chance for elite and audience future. reflection. Consequently, one clear signal of impending government repression is Official party lines in approved articles from US military personnel also speak the higher likelihood of restriction of the latter format, which Britain has done with of controlling the media to control terrorism. For example, a Quantico-based respect to IRA and the US with respect to Canadian and USSR documentaries. Marine Corps provost marshal has joined the call for a “war” against terrorism, Government leaders prefer to use “one-liners” and event formats to inform the with the media conscripted to play a vital part in the process (Wilber, 1985, pp.20- public, engineer consent, label, depersonalize, and delegitimize the “enemy,” and 23). He says that “something more than peacenik campouts around our European curry favor for governmental positions, however untenable. The increasingly missile installations ought to be considered in our terrorist planning.” This officer common pictorial news headline format, which is “just good television,” helps to was very much in favor of professional media guidelines along ethical lines in achieve these purposes. contrast to those based on “event-oriented sensationalism” or “mundane Cross-national surveys at the end of the 1970s indicated that most West commercialism.” Unless the media clean up their act, the colonel said, “assertions Germans, British, and Americans believed terrorism was a very serious problem. of national interest may ultimately take priority over the public’s historic rights to Respondents wanted the death penalty for terrorists, sanctioned use of “special be informed.” Guidelines need to be “mutually acceptable, realistic, and workable” forces,” and accepted police state or extraordinary measures against them. They and “applied by both sides during terrorist incidents,” but so done that they “do not also accepted news embargoes and monitored conversations with lawyers during a foster the idea of ‘sides’” (Wilber, 1985, p. 21). For example, USIA proposals for a terrorist crisis. Also of concern was being careful not to appear pro-terrorist. This blue ribbon panel on media self-regulation and guidelines were also endorsed as meant opposing the death penalty, supporting legal aid, feeling pity, or believing topics for media and law enforcement discussions, after socializing in ice-breaker some of the terrorist’s criticisms were unjustified (Gerbner and Gerbner, July 1988, sessions. These sessions could relieve media paranoia and lead to soul-searching p. 3). Despite these popular fears, Gerbner maintains the greatest threat is recognition by the media that they are part of both the problem and the solution. “collective, official, organized and legitimized violence.” Television violence and The media themselves must resist manipulation, dissuade imitators, and use small-scale terrorist attacks are not as dangerous to social stability as are “illicit proportionality, balance, objectivity, context, and minimum intrusiveness in their commerce, wars, unemployment, and other social trends that allow the wielders of terrorist coverage. These principles require the use of pools, less obtrusive lighting, power “to depersonalize enemies, to cultivate vulnerability and dependence in limits on interviews primary reliance on officially designated spokesmen as sources subordinates, to achieve instant support for swift and tough measures at home and of information, and avoidance of tactical questioning. They should also delay abroad in what is presented as an exceedingly mean and scary world” (Gerbner and inflammatory reporting, suppress information on incident locations, obscure Gerbner, July 1988, p. 3). tactical information, balance information from participants with official sources, The government is one of the prime sources of emotional and pejorative use predisclosure verification of facts, and avoid the spectacular. These are basic descriptions of anti-state activities. Nevertheless, it is strange, indeed, that the FBI and commonsense, workable, and palatable media guidelines, according to the and State Department are often the prime movers behind media and public policies provost marshal. “The right of a hostage to survive and the right of a society to self- designed to ensure self-control or to mandate guidelines for media’s coverage after preservation are also important rights, too important to be left to the media” each such violent frenzy. Terrorists are such an embarrassment to the US State and (Wilber, 1985, p. 23). To ensure reasonable accommodation, the media and its Defense Departments that Secretaries George Shultz and Caspar Weinberger academic allies must accede to these simple rules of operation. Zemel versus Rusk wanted nothing to do with the Iran-contra arms deal, which Poindexter and North (1965) was quoted approvingly to the effect that “[t]he right to speak and publish managed out of the Reagan White House. In 1988, Shultz banned Arafat from does not carry with it the unrestrained right to gather information” (Rusk, 1965, pp. attending the United Nations meeting in New York, forcing the General Assembly 16-17). to meet in Geneva. His rationale was based on the PLO’s alleged terrorist links and Just why the US government should be seeking self-restraint or prior restraints nonrenunciation of terrorism. Arafat subsequently renounced terrorism, terrorist on media’s – and especially television’s – coverage of terrorism or should be enlist- 290 Russell F. Farnen ing the media as an ally in the “war” against terrorism is not easily explained. With such limitations in place, the media establishment’s quasi-adversarial role vis á vis the government would be further compromised through another form of governmental cooptation. When the concept of a “war on terrorism” comes into being, the media partners risk becoming tools or voices for the state, much as they did with managed news events during the Grenada invasion, the Libyan air strike, and other military operations against Libyan aircraft and the Achille Lauro hijackers. Press treatment of incidents such as the TWA 847 case is usually rather bland, pro-government biased, and hostage oriented. Atwater’s (1988, pp. 1-8) study of network news coverage of the TWA flight 847 hijacking indicated that there was massive television coverage of this event, with 12 hours of coverage devoted to it over the June 14-30, 1985 period. Although Laqueur (1977) and Alexander (1978) maintain that publicity is the key to terrorism’s success and that establishment media wittingly or unwittingly are tools of terrorist strategy, this did not prove true in the TWA case study. Atwater found that most reports came from Washington or New York and few from the actual site. Over half of the stories were on hostage conditions and US government reactions. Far fewer focused on terrorist demands, acts, Islam, or Lebanese internal or external difficulties. While the coverage was “dramatic, reactive, and extensive,” the Iranian crisis mode of reporting was used. It had great detail, but no interpretation or education useful to the viewers, this finding was similar to that noted in the Paletz, et al. (1982, pp. 146-165) study of the IRA, FALN, and Red Brigades coverage in network news. The networks treated these groups evenly, covering the same events with a similar portrayal. There was not legitimacy afforded the groups. Their causes were not defined as just. No explanation was given of the causes or objectives behind the acts of violence, and most stories did not even mention the organization or its supporters. In a follow-up study of network news coverage of terrorism (see Milburn, et al., reported in Gerbner and Gerbner, 1988), not only were such causes ignored, but severe mental instability was also ascribed to both terrorists and their leaders. This line, of course, implies that no negotiations are possible with “crazy people.” Since governments have, or ought to have, control of the scene of a crisis or crime, they can limit media access as they would in any war, crisis, or emergency zone. Publishing and reporting terrorist events, however, are responsibilities of the press, not the government. As Dallas Morning News Executive Editor Ralph Langer (Genovese, 1988, p. 151) said, “the basic cause of terrorism is not news coverage. . . . Terrorism comes from real or perceived disputes and problems that aren’t resolved.” Should media ignore terrorism, terrorists may well escalate the level of violence. Further, the credibility of the press will be questioned across the board if terrorism is squelched in the news. As Chicago Tribune Editor James Squires maintains: 290 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 291 ing the media as an ally in the “war” against terrorism is not easily explained. With No policy other than a policy balancing hostages with national security and readers’ such limitations in place, the media establishment’s quasi-adversarial role vis á vis interests is all that can be hoped for in a free and responsible press environment. . . . We the government would be further compromised through another form of don’t want to be used and manipulated by anyone. So we try to be as skeptical and as governmental cooptation. When the concept of a “war on terrorism” comes into cautious about being compromised in the interest of some special cause or group of people as we are on a day-to-day basis when we deal with government (Genovese, 1988, being, the media partners risk becoming tools or voices for the state, much as they pp. 151-152). did with managed news events during the Grenada invasion, the Libyan air strike, and other military operations against Libyan aircraft and the Achille Lauro Should such guidelines be negotiated or legislated, they would likely be hijackers. unenforceable. The press would also be made to suffer for any alleged violations. Press treatment of incidents such as the TWA 847 case is usually rather bland, When the government seeks involuntary guidelines and prior restraint, the classic pro-government biased, and hostage oriented. Atwater’s (1988, pp. 1-8) study of case of the sovereign blaming the messenger who brought the bad news comes to network news coverage of the TWA flight 847 hijacking indicated that there was mind. Should the press be forced to surrender its historic role as the fourth estate’s massive television coverage of this event, with 12 hours of coverage devoted to it check on governmental power as a specious palliative to quiet minimalist over the June 14-30, 1985 period. Although Laqueur (1977) and Alexander (1978) terrorism? The government and the terrorists may each share an interest in maintain that publicity is the key to terrorism’s success and that establishment controlling the press, but the public’s interest is certainly not thereby served. media wittingly or unwittingly are tools of terrorist strategy, this did not prove true In this regard, R. J. Rummel’s (1988, p. 60) studies of the relationships among in the TWA case study. political systems, violence, and war are worth noting. Rummel’s empirical research Atwater found that most reports came from Washington or New York and few indicated that the more democratic a political system, the less likely the incidence from the actual site. Over half of the stories were on hostage conditions and US of internal violence against its people and the less likely the event of war with other government reactions. Far fewer focused on terrorist demands, acts, Islam, or states, particularly democratic states. The reverse is true for totalitarian states. Lebanese internal or external difficulties. While the coverage was “dramatic, Internal violence in the 20th century has been three times as bloody as that from all reactive, and extensive,” the Iranian crisis mode of reporting was used. It had great the wars in this time period. Rummel concluded that, “[i]n a nutshell, democratic detail, but no interpretation or education useful to the viewers, this finding was freedom promotes nonviolence” To “minimize collective violence” and elements of similar to that noted in the Paletz, et al. (1982, pp. 146-165) study of the IRA, war, “. . . one must embrace and foster democratic institutions, civil liberties, and FALN, and Red Brigades coverage in network news. The networks treated these political rights here and abroad” (Rummel, 1988, p. 60). This proactive democratic groups evenly, covering the same events with a similar portrayal. There was not stance toward preventing internal and external violence may also be applicable as a legitimacy afforded the groups. Their causes were not defined as just. No tool in the real campaign against terrorism at home and abroad. explanation was given of the causes or objectives behind the acts of violence, and Other advocates of proactive media roles for conflict resolution hope to reduce most stories did not even mention the organization or its supporters. In a follow-up group grievances, frustration, and despair by using forums and encouraging free study of network news coverage of terrorism (see Milburn, et al., reported in expression. These vehicles would afford a hearing, provide legitimacy when Gerbner and Gerbner, 1988), not only were such causes ignored, but severe mental appropriate, and lend credibility to the unnecessary use of violence in a media-rich instability was also ascribed to both terrorists and their leaders. This line, of course, society. Present media modes reward terrorists for using violence; new modes implies that no negotiations are possible with “crazy people.” could reward the sensible discussion of nonviolent alternatives to past aggression, Since governments have, or ought to have, control of the scene of a crisis or fearsome reports, coerced coverage, and lengthy media-prolonged violence. crime, they can limit media access as they would in any war, crisis, or emergency Though these alternatives, like the diffusion theory (as an alternative to the zone. Publishing and reporting terrorist events, however, are responsibilities of the contagion theory), are worthy of consideration, the, like allege media-exacerbating press, not the government. As Dallas Morning News Executive Editor Ralph behavior, are als based on informed judgments or suppositions. That is, although Langer (Genovese, 1988, p. 151) said, “the basic cause of terrorism is not news they are hypotheses, they are still sound ideas worthy of testing. The provision of a coverage. . . . Terrorism comes from real or perceived disputes and problems that UNO office to the PLO; extensive Western media coverage of Arafat, Gaza, and aren’t resolved.” Should media ignore terrorism, terrorists may well escalate the West Bank Palestinian uprisings; PLO acceptance of Israel and rejection of level of violence. Further, the credibility of the press will be questioned across the terrorism; and US diplomatic initiatives toward the PLO are all recent and relevant board if terrorism is squelched in the news. As Chicago Tribune Editor James developments. They indicate that what Secretary of State Shultz as recently as 1988 Squires maintains: called a “terrorist group” (thus refusing Arafat a US visa to speak at the United 292 Russell F. Farnen Nations) may eventually enjoy UN observer status, as does Switzerland. And the US moral stature cannot be increased through an erratic policy which one day declares a group anathema and the next day offers it a seat at the bargaining table. Of course, post hoc interviews with those responsible for prior violent acts, such as the IRA, PLF, Red Army, or Animal Liberationists, also make some sense. The group’s motives, grievances, plans, and demands can be safely revealed in these “media therapy” sessions, which provide a safety valve and a legitimate platform for dissenting views. Causes, policies, alternatives, shared selection of and control over topics, propaganda encounters, and deep and informed questioning would be necessary parts of such formats. Replies to critics who are sure to label them as “meet your friendly neighborhood terrorist” shows must also be con- sidered. But unless the national government is supportive of, and participates in, such programs, they are likely to fail. Even the recent Columbia School of Journalism Media Studies Center series, which focused on the media and terrorism, failed to have any “guests of dishonor” at the event. No PLO, IRA, PQ, Basque, or Puerto Rican Nationalist advocates or spokespersons were present. Trying terrorism in absentia in such forms, which specialize in exchanging the conven- tional wisdom about media guidelines (voluntary or imposed) versus press freedom, will do little to prevent forthcoming violence in which media are sure to be major actors. Since 1982, the British government has actually used the threat of IRA terrorism to restrict English press freedom and, more recently, to circumscribe the right of witnesses against self-incrimination – a 300-year-old procedural due process rule which applies to all citizens, terrorists and nonterrorists alike. Similarly, the US State Department strenuously opposed an NBC news interview of 3.5 minutes duration in May 1986 with a PLF leader involved in the Achille Lauro hijacking. A spokesperson claimed that “terrorism thrives on this kind of publicity,” and it “encourages” that which we are seeking to “deter” (Picard, July 1988, p. 6). Healthy debates about the broader causes of violence (e.g., publicity seeking, easy transport, cheap weapons and explosives, private and governmental funding, and media and governmental intransigence) may be more useful contexts for media-based discussions of the terrorism dilemma (Picard, July 1988, p. 5). Rather than seeking a single cause for this seemingly irrational and antistatist form of protest (which has existed for thousands of year), terrorism must be placed in the context of typical violent reactions to the existence of normally violent societies. Moreover, the realities of modern technology have promoted the state’s monopoly on the use of force. World arms sales annually total in the hundreds of billions. A puny group of terrorists is nothing compared with the thousands of preventable highway, drug, and job-related deaths every year or a 3-million person US military establishment, with annual budgets approaching $300 billion per year. This is just another necessary part of the context needed for understanding terrorism in the late 20th century. 292 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 293 Nations) may eventually enjoy UN observer status, as does Switzerland. And the Recent events such as the Pan Am flight 103 bombing in December 1988 and US moral stature cannot be increased through an erratic policy which one day the poisoned Chilean grapes incident in March 1989 indicate that terrorism has declares a group anathema and the next day offers it a seat at the bargaining table. transformed itself in a variety of ways. No group claims responsibility for the Of course, post hoc interviews with those responsible for prior violent acts, crimes, the incidents are at the miniature or micro levels (a transistor radio bomb or such as the IRA, PLF, Red Army, or Animal Liberationists, also make some sense. hypodermic syringe filled with poison), and the protagonists and antagonists The group’s motives, grievances, plans, and demands can be safely revealed in operate at the highest symbolic level of abstraction (i.e., symbols of a whole these “media therapy” sessions, which provide a safety valve and a legitimate country are randomly threatened and/or attacked). These recent events also portend platform for dissenting views. Causes, policies, alternatives, shared selection of and the likely continuance of this micro-level violence. It, perhaps, may take on still control over topics, propaganda encounters, and deep and informed questioning newer forms, such as the use of chemical-biological weapons rather than nuclear would be necessary parts of such formats. Replies to critics who are sure to label suitcase-size devices. These will have total, surgical, quick, and limited them as “meet your friendly neighborhood terrorist” shows must also be con- geographical effects on a specific population group, such as a city. Biological- sidered. But unless the national government is supportive of, and participates in, chemical terrorists would not run the risk of unexpected, collateral, and universally such programs, they are likely to fail. Even the recent Columbia School of unpopular results which would follow even the smallest nuclear explosion. Journalism Media Studies Center series, which focused on the media and terrorism, When handling these recent events, the Western media mainly showed the failed to have any “guests of dishonor” at the event. No PLO, IRA, PQ, Basque, or carnage, ascribed blame to the British and American governments for inadequate Puerto Rican Nationalist advocates or spokespersons were present. Trying forewarning, and provided emotional coverage of victims’ families. The grape terrorism in absentia in such forms, which specialize in exchanging the conven- incident was handled in a fashion that played up public fears, intensified the tional wisdom about media guidelines (voluntary or imposed) versus press danger, and illustrated governmental (FDA) competence in protecting the public’s freedom, will do little to prevent forthcoming violence in which media are sure to health and safety. Without a clear sense of a victim, victimizer, demand, goal, or be major actors. Since 1982, the British government has actually used the threat of continuing dramatic process in the Pan Am 103 bombing, the media were forced to IRA terrorism to restrict English press freedom and, more recently, to circumscribe improvise in their reporting formats. While they met the standard criteria for news, the right of witnesses against self-incrimination – a 300-year-old procedural due these bizarre occurrences failed to meet the typical standards for a terrorist drama. process rule which applies to all citizens, terrorists and nonterrorists alike. Once again, however, the media greatly magnified these events as threats to us all Similarly, the US State Department strenuously opposed an NBC news interview of as well as incidences of sudden and unexpected violence. Yet they continually 3.5 minutes duration in May 1986 with a PLF leader involved in the Achille Lauro failed to provide any context (other than governmental competence of blundering) hijacking. A spokesperson claimed that “terrorism thrives on this kind of for the public to interpret these new features of the changing face of international publicity,” and it “encourages” that which we are seeking to “deter” (Picard, July terrorism. 1988, p. 6). The political environment or symbolic context for terrorism also relates to the Healthy debates about the broader causes of violence (e.g., publicity seeking, centrality of the pledge of allegiance debate in the 1988 presidential elections. easy transport, cheap weapons and explosives, private and governmental funding, National pride and personal loyalty were introduced as campaign issues, just as and media and governmental intransigence) may be more useful contexts for they previously had been in the Klinghoffer case, the Achille Lauro hijacking, and media-based discussions of the terrorism dilemma (Picard, July 1988, p. 5). Rather the TWA 847 incident, in which a living symbol of America’s military was than seeking a single cause for this seemingly irrational and antistatist form of denigrated, brutalized, and murdered. When national emotions are allowed to protest (which has existed for thousands of year), terrorism must be placed in the exaggerate what is essentially a police matter into an international incident which context of typical violent reactions to the existence of normally violent societies. provokes (as did the bombing of the Berlin disco) a military assault on Libya and Moreover, the realities of modern technology have promoted the state’s monopoly the US counterhijacking of an Egyptian ally’s plane as responses to terrorism, more on the use of force. World arms sales annually total in the hundreds of billions. A sensible options must surely be available. This is merely “knee-jerk” patriotism, puny group of terrorists is nothing compared with the thousands of preventable which invites even further provocation and combative retaliation down the line. highway, drug, and job-related deaths every year or a 3-million person US military As a case in point, on January 8, 1988, Ted Koppel, host of ABC’s Nightline, establishment, with annual budgets approaching $300 billion per year. This is just had Yassir Arafat as his guest. Arafat maintained that the US and Israel were united another necessary part of the context needed for understanding terrorism in the late in “state terrorism” against Palestinian, Libyan, and other peoples. Though Koppel 20th century. pressed him, Arafat held his ground. Moreover, the abundant international media 294 Russell F. Farnen coverage which Arafat received in 1988 (during the UNO Geneva meetings and as a result of the US-PLO diplomatic rapprochement) failed to inspire a rash of terrorist incidents or proterrorist sentiment in the US or elsewhere. Though Arafat received widespread media coverage, the state-directed antiterrorist system has not collapsed. Censoring him or other advocates of unpopular, antiestablishment positions in the US makes no sense in a democratic society. Short-term solutions to the terrorist-media interaction often focus on media self-censorship, responsibility, and restraint. For example, the Hartford Courant’s editor and publisher, Michael Davis, recently endorsed media self-censorship in the recent Lt. Dol. William Higgins murder and the Joseph J. Cicippio videotapes widely broadcast on network television. Davies applauded ABC and Peter Jennings, the ABC News superstar anchorman, for refusing to be “used as a vehicle by terrorists” and labeling the event “a characteristic tactic to put pressure on the US and Israel via the American public” (Davies, 1989, p. 83). Charles Glass, and ABC correspondent and former videotaped hostage also joined in support of the ABC position by claiming that such broadcasts “hurt the hostages’ position because it was doing exactly what the captors wanted.” Davies applauded the ABC position and said this was a far cry from the TWA flight 847 hijacking days when the networks were used “as a megaphone for terrorists” because their job was to report the news, competition demanded it, and the consequences were irrelevant. Despite their “lack of restraint,” ABC News and Jennings, said Davies, “are blazing new tails for television without leaving the American public uninformed.” He added, “Hooray for them. When will the other networks catch up?” In addition to providing a fine example of the prevailing view on prior self-restrint, it is also interesting to contrast Davies’ earlier views on the media’s need to avoid “a conspiracy of silence” in terrorist reporting (Davies, 1985). Before the business of government becomes regulation of the news in the name of national security and symbolism, the free press needs to inform the public about policy alternatives and just what is at stake. This may mean antagonizing the old or new power brokers, who would have the media promote even more of their private financial, oligopolic, and corporate interests, which deregulation has only encouraged. Mass media news coverage is tame, bland, and establishment-oriented as it is. To promote further restrictions would not only be redundant, it would also serve to erode our shrinking press freedom even further. Discussion and Conclusions The foregoing analysis of the terrorism/media/government/public opinion/policy- making connection is mainly useful for a general analysis of the topic. It helps, perhaps, to explain how the media have interacted with the US cultural milieu to affect American norms, values, attitudes, interests, and perceptions about terrorism as a recurrent crisis event and its perception as an enduring public problem. The broadcasting industry is but one part of a broader institutional framework for the 294 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 295 coverage which Arafat received in 1988 (during the UNO Geneva meetings and as identification, definition, salience estimation, evaluation, policy formulation, and a result of the US-PLO diplomatic rapprochement) failed to inspire a rash of assessment of terrorism as a public issue. terrorist incidents or proterrorist sentiment in the US or elsewhere. Though Arafat The focus of this chapter has been on those aspects of the terrorist phenomenon received widespread media coverage, the state-directed antiterrorist system has not in which the media play a critical role. This is mainly in determining the definition, collapsed. Censoring him or other advocates of unpopular, antiestablishment ownership, context, agenda, importance, proportionality, selection of alternatives, positions in the US makes no sense in a democratic society. technological ramifications, power relationships, and evaluative aspects of the Short-term solutions to the terrorist-media interaction often focus on media issue. These are all important parts of the terrorism question. They are also ones to self-censorship, responsibility, and restraint. For example, the Hartford Courant’s which media are closely linked – as are the terrorists, the US government, other editor and publisher, Michael Davis, recently endorsed media self-censorship in the governments, and public spectators. The latter also serve as cheerleaders, critics, recent Lt. Dol. William Higgins murder and the Joseph J. Cicippio videotapes consumers, judges, and juries in evaluating and assessing media and official widely broadcast on network television. Davies applauded ABC and Peter policies and countermeasures. Jennings, the ABC News superstar anchorman, for refusing to be “used as a vehicle The communication aspects of this political, economic, and social problem are by terrorists” and labeling the event “a characteristic tactic to put pressure on the vital parts of the eventual solution used to resolve or ameliorate terrorism as a US and Israel via the American public” (Davies, 1989, p. 83). Charles Glass, and problem or crisis. Be they active military or countercrimianal (i.e., forcible) ABC correspondent and former videotaped hostage also joined in support of the options, active negotiations, or passive acceptance or forbearance of that which is ABC position by claiming that such broadcasts “hurt the hostages’ position because intractable (hostages in captivity), the media are as much partners in the event as it was doing exactly what the captors wanted.” Davies applauded the ABC position are the other major dramatic actors. Resolution of this problem, with its and said this was a far cry from the TWA flight 847 hijacking days when the international dimensions, would require looking at the phenomenon from other networks were used “as a megaphone for terrorists” because their job was to report important vantage points of the policy process. These include careful examination the news, competition demanded it, and the consequences were irrelevant. Despite of hidden and preexistent causes of the multidimensional problem, nonmilitary their “lack of restraint,” ABC News and Jennings, said Davies, “are blazing new policy options that have proved successful in the past, media techniques for context tails for television without leaving the American public uninformed.” He added, development, and continual search for a favorable climate to encourage “Hooray for them. When will the other networks catch up?” In addition to international, diplomatic, and law enforcement solutions to such incidents, each of providing a fine example of the prevailing view on prior self-restrint, it is also which has both unique and generic features. interesting to contrast Davies’ earlier views on the media’s need to avoid “a In both its international and domestic forms, terrorism has many guises and conspiracy of silence” in terrorist reporting (Davies, 1985). multiple causes. It is not a monolith any more than world communism has ever Before the business of government becomes regulation of the news in the name been. Simplistic solutions, such as using strike teams, demanding media self- of national security and symbolism, the free press needs to inform the public about censorship, threatening military invasion, bombing terrorist training camps, policy alternatives and just what is at stake. This may mean antagonizing the old or declaring war, or otherwise violating international law, will only create much larger new power brokers, who would have the media promote even more of their private problems (the dimensions of which are beyond speculation) for Americans. The financial, oligopolic, and corporate interests, which deregulation has only policy implications of US options seriously considered in past international encouraged. Mass media news coverage is tame, bland, and establishment-oriented conflicts (e.g., carrying the ground war in Vietnam to the north; using force to as it is. To promote further restrictions would not only be redundant, it would also break the Berlin blockade’ invading Cuba, Iran, or Libya; placing large numbers of serve to erode our shrinking press freedom even further. American military “advisers” in Afghanistan or Nicaragua, etc.) are too horrific to contemplate. Each of these untried options would have been costly, deadly, and Discussion and Conclusions disastrous in the long and short run. No pax Americana or pax Sovietica against world terrorism has been or will be possible in our lifetimes, nor is this a necessary, The foregoing analysis of the terrorism/media/government/public opinion/policy- desirable, or practical hope. Terrorism as a public phenomenon is intimately and making connection is mainly useful for a general analysis of the topic. It helps, intricately connected to America’s cold war mentality, which maintained a national perhaps, to explain how the media have interacted with the US cultural milieu to security state to the tune of more than $300 billion per year. American taxpayers affect American norms, values, attitudes, interests, and perceptions about terrorism and consumers expected more for their money than keeping the peace through as a recurrent crisis event and its perception as an enduring public problem. The deterrence. They wanted the security of a star wars umbrella, secure transportation broadcasting industry is but one part of a broader institutional framework for the 296 Russell F. Farnen technology, and a peaceful world, dominated by American national, social, economic, and political values. They distrusted the Russians, the Arabs, the mainland Chinese, the Japanese, and most of the other peoples living on what was increasingly considered to be a very scary planet. The United States has had a long and bloody history. We have been at war (both declared and undeclared) about one-third of the time since our baptism by fire as a new nation. This violent past continues to the present day and is symbolized by comments such as that of the 1960s black radical H. “Rap” Brown (1969), who said that “violence is as American as cherry pie.” The recent Time magazine report in July 1989 on just one week of US gun-related deaths indicated that the large majority of the victims died at their own hands, were the objects of someone known to them, or were just accidents. This was a far more common cause of death than the criminal use of weapons. The number of “underclass” Americans who were victims of these weapons was conspicuous in these statistics. While standing behind our nuclear deterrents, we seldom negotiate weapons reductions, except for the recent INF and CFE treaties. The US (with the USSR) has been a principal arms merchant for the world. We commit highway mayhem daily and practice domestic violence at home with a vengeance. It extends everywhere. Knee-jerk militarism is publicly supported at every turn. For example, in August 1989, a majority of Americans wanted to send US troops into Colombia to fight narcoterrorism, and only one-third of respondents objected (based on a Newsweek poll reported on National Public Radio on August 28, 1989). Middle East Muslim spokespersons decry the use of Christian bombs dropped by Israeli aircraft against Arab noncombatants. The cycle of violence in which international terrorism is enmeshed must be broken if the US mass media are to become more civilized and humane. The mass media have played an essential role in the construction of a national paranoia about foreign peoples and governments, into which ethnocentric schema terrorists all too easily fit. The detachment of terrorism from America’s symbolic conflict with the rest of the world (in which our national ego is improperly enmeshed beyond mere ethnocentricism) is the responsibility not only of the broadcasting industry, but also of responsible educators, clerics, politicians, opinion leaders, and world figures who regularly influence what we hold close as “our own” facts and opinions. It is these real, peace-oriented counterterrorists who can focus attention on the pressing problems of the day; hunger, homelessness, disease, drugs, authoritarianism, racism, environmental and species destruction, militarism, and so forth – from which terrorism springs and by which terrorism pales in com- parison. If national and international priorities are misplaced, the mass media can help to reorient them, but this cannot be done single-handedly. The US mass media have been particularly susceptible to elite control and influence from the corporate board rooms of networks and advertisers, from the publisher and producers, or from network superstars or editors. The news we get, how much, and what type is 296 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 297 technology, and a peaceful world, dominated by American national, social, prescreened and filtered through these elite few who act as gatekeepers and agenda economic, and political values. They distrusted the Russians, the Arabs, the setters. These circles of power are subject to governmental, organizational, and mainland Chinese, the Japanese, and most of the other peoples living on what was public pressures that can also exert influence. For example, interest groups, such as increasingly considered to be a very scary planet. Action for Children’s Television or Ralph Nader’s Public Interest Lobby, have had The United States has had a long and bloody history. We have been at war some impact on televised violence or public interest reporting. There are now (both declared and undeclared) about one-third of the time since our baptism by fire enough of these groups sharing a common interest in breaking the cycle of media- as a new nation. This violent past continues to the present day and is symbolized by reinforced violence that some countervailing power against gratuitous violence can comments such as that of the 1960s black radical H. “Rap” Brown (1969), who said be exercised within First Amendment limits. Terrorism, crime reporting, police that “violence is as American as cherry pie.” The recent Time magazine report in show, war news, and other public celebrations or unexplained violence feed on one July 1989 on just one week of US gun-related deaths indicated that the large another in a systemic and symbiotic fashion. A more careful analysis of these majority of the victims died at their own hands, were the objects of someone known interrelationships, connected with efforts to break the actual cycle of domestic and to them, or were just accidents. This was a far more common cause of death than international violence in which the US participates, might help produce both a less the criminal use of weapons. The number of “underclass” Americans who were scary and less violent society against which many international terrorists now strive victims of these weapons was conspicuous in these statistics. While standing measure for measure. behind our nuclear deterrents, we seldom negotiate weapons reductions, except for Blaming the media for our ills (in effect, threatening to imprison the bearer of the recent INF and CFE treaties. The US (with the USSR) has been a principal bad news) will be short-sighted and ineffective as a solution to world terrorism. arms merchant for the world. We commit highway mayhem daily and practice The media’s responsibility in this public problem is to rethink its role along domestic violence at home with a vengeance. It extends everywhere. Knee-jerk fundamental lines of analysis. Essential guidelines for the reanalysis include militarism is publicly supported at every turn. For example, in August 1989, a adopting certain overlapping maxims for a sound reassessment. These include, for majority of Americans wanted to send US troops into Colombia to fight example, 1) expressing unwillingness to be used exploitatively by terrorists or narcoterrorism, and only one-third of respondents objected (based on a Newsweek official spokespersons; 2) independently redefining terrorism as a public problem; poll reported on National Public Radio on August 28, 1989). Middle East Muslim 3) setting contexts for terrorist incidents in a responsible way; 4) seeking spokespersons decry the use of Christian bombs dropped by Israeli aircraft against alternative nonmilitary solutions to violent domestic or international incidents; 5) Arab noncombatants. The cycle of violence in which international terrorism is developing independent sources for information on such incidents from foreign enmeshed must be broken if the US mass media are to become more civilized and news reports and observers; 6) keeping abreast of terrorist groups through network humane. and wire service research files and newspaper “morgues”; 7) providing regular con- The mass media have played an essential role in the construction of a national textual treatment in stories, broadcasts, documentaries, interviews, and discussion paranoia about foreign peoples and governments, into which ethnocentric schema formats of terrorism groups, goals, countermeasures, leaders, arms, techniques, and terrorists all too easily fit. The detachment of terrorism from America’s symbolic uses of technology; 8) freely interviewing terrorist spokespersons in news segments conflict with the rest of the world (in which our national ego is improperly and group discussion formats; 9) deinstitutionalizing terrorism, and recon- enmeshed beyond mere ethnocentricism) is the responsibility not only of the textualizing, humanizing, and personalizing the phenomenon; 10) using the many broadcasting industry, but also of responsible educators, clerics, politicians, opinion communications levers at hand to provide terrorism with a human face; 11) leaders, and world figures who regularly influence what we hold close as “our providing air time to radical critics (such as Noam Chomsky) who make a case for own” facts and opinions. It is these real, peace-oriented counterterrorists who can US involvement in state terrorism and the excesses of our allies (e.g., against the focus attention on the pressing problems of the day; hunger, homelessness, disease, oppressed Palestinians in Israeli-occupied territories); 12) developing game plans drugs, authoritarianism, racism, environmental and species destruction, militarism, for reporting on domestic and international violence and terrorism that explore no and so forth – from which terrorism springs and by which terrorism pales in com- forcible solutions until the bitter end, despite daily pressures to do otherwise; 13) parison. If national and international priorities are misplaced, the mass media can developing “white papers,” television journals, television specials, and other in- help to reorient them, but this cannot be done single-handedly. The US mass media depth programs on terrorism that have a life beyond the dramatic moments of their have been particularly susceptible to elite control and influence from the corporate broadcasts in journalism, politics, psychology, and sociology classes and public board rooms of networks and advertisers, from the publisher and producers, or educational forums, such as the Kettering Foundation’s National Public Issues from network superstars or editors. The news we get, how much, and what type is Forums annual nationwide town meetings of citizen discussion groups and study 298 Russell F. Farnen circles; and 14) redefining the news canon so that terrorism can be divided into its component manifestations (i.e., domestic and international; political and economic; significant or insignificant; state-sponsored, -supported, or -aided; or private, unique or patterned; well-documented or vague – in terms of causes or perpetrators; low- or high-level symbolic; grievance-based or irrational; and like categories). The media’s responsibility in leading such an analysis of terrorism would have wide-ranging significance for our communications proficiency and media competence. The range of significant social issues (going beyond terrorists as outcast barbarians and enemies) which could be discussed in such an approach would immeasurable contribute to our social and intellectual enlightenment as intelligent media consumers. Therefore, while we can accept media’s important role in the definition and amplification of world terrorism, one cannot blame or hold solely responsible the messenger for the message. We can, however, hold the broadcast industry responsible for helping to educate all of us on what to think about and how to respond to tomorrow’s or next year’s terrorist event, for it will surely come and in a new wrapping – conceivably chemical, biological, or even nuclear. Current conflicts in South Africa and Northern Ireland, like the former civil war in Algeria, exhibit the elements of civil strife rather than terrorist activity. This is also true of Nicaragua, Cuba, El Salvador, Burundi, Cambodia, Chile, Angola, and other conflicts in which individual terrorist acts or wholesale mass murder took place. Media’s role is to help us sort out each type of violence, relating the facts to resistance against tyranny, wholesale slaughter, or something in between. Media must also tell us when these unheard trees fall in distant political forests, since our own government has no interest in doing so unless our official interests are threatened. In 1946, UNESCO declared that, since wars begin in the minds of men, it is there that the defenses of peace should be constructed. Much the same is true of terrorism. The media can be frontline forces in this permanent and larger battle to wage peace and to ensure justice and popular sovereignty at home and abroad. The course of international terrorism continues to run along well-established but increasingly meandering lines. Recent developments, all heralded in the international mass media, indicate that terrorism as a media subject still excites public interest and concern. Daily news reports, new books and articles, and television programs depict motorboat assaults on Israeli beaches, the cessation of US diplomatic initiatives toward the PLO, and the latest flaws in TNA, and surveillance techniques designed to promote airline safety. The drama of terrorism as an indigenous national problem (as with the Basques and the IRA) or as a state- supported international movement (as in the case of sanctuary for Red Brigade leaders in the German Democratic Republic along with safe passage for other notables, such as the infamous “Carlos,” in Eastern Europe) continues to interest scholars, journalists, and media consumers alike. Members of the Arafat family, 298 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 299 circles; and 14) redefining the news canon so that terrorism can be divided into its such as Yasir and his brother, are now featured in Washington Post and Times component manifestations (i.e., domestic and international; political and economic; (London) articles in conjunction with lengthy biographical specials of the “this Is significant or insignificant; state-sponsored, -supported, or -aided; or private, Your Life” variety, which only tangentially relate to the essential features of the unique or patterned; well-documented or vague – in terms of causes or perpetrators; terrorism dialog and debate. With all this, the saga of terrorism seems to provoke low- or high-level symbolic; grievance-based or irrational; and like categories). either explanations, answers, or solutions (as in the debates over freedom fighter The media’s responsibility in leading such an analysis of terrorism would have versus terrorist, national versus international responses, and national versus wide-ranging significance for our communications proficiency and media international causes and solutions). However, with the passage of time, the competence. The range of significant social issues (going beyond terrorists as proponents of international approaches to solve such problems seem to have the outcast barbarians and enemies) which could be discussed in such an approach edge in terms of the weight of their arguments and applicability to a changing would immeasurable contribute to our social and intellectual enlightenment as world situation. New considerations of the multiple causes of terrorism, its vari- intelligent media consumers. Therefore, while we can accept media’s important eties, similarities, and uniqueness, and like analyses point toward the utility of role in the definition and amplification of world terrorism, one cannot blame or removing or ameliorating the causes of terrorism and increasing the use of East- hold solely responsible the messenger for the message. We can, however, hold the West and North-South cooperation to promote information exchange, to provide broadcast industry responsible for helping to educate all of us on what to think extradition when warranted, and to monitor cross-national activities of potential about and how to respond to tomorrow’s or next year’s terrorist event, for it will perpetrators of violence against innocent civilians. surely come and in a new wrapping – conceivably chemical, biological, or even In this respect, the May 1990 presidential report from the Aviation Security and nuclear. Terrorism Commission (which, naturally, made instant news headlines) is an Current conflicts in South Africa and Northern Ireland, like the former civil anomaly, out of synch with the passage of events. This report might have been war in Algeria, exhibit the elements of civil strife rather than terrorist activity. This more properly titled “The Lockerbie Report” since it was a necessary political is also true of Nicaragua, Cuba, El Salvador, Burundi, Cambodia, Chile, Angola, response to the tragic deaths of 270 people in December 1988. Some of the and other conflicts in which individual terrorist acts or wholesale mass murder took commission’s proposals (such as improving airport security procedures) are self- place. Media’s role is to help us sort out each type of violence, relating the facts to evident and reflect current policy anyway. However, it would have been nice if the resistance against tyranny, wholesale slaughter, or something in between. Media details about TNA machine failures had not been so explicit since this might have must also tell us when these unheard trees fall in distant political forests, since our provided a measure of comfort to travelers as well as a deterrent to some would-be own government has no interest in doing so unless our official interests are bombers. Some of the commission’s other proposals (for example, appointing a threatened. new “terrorist czar” in the State Department and improving their emergency In 1946, UNESCO declared that, since wars begin in the minds of men, it is notification procedures, and allowing the CIA to do covert investigations) may or there that the defenses of peace should be constructed. Much the same is true of may not accomplish much. Only time will tell if these measures will have any terrorism. The media can be frontline forces in this permanent and larger battle to specific (since they are unlikely to have any general) effects on terrorist activities. wage peace and to ensure justice and popular sovereignty at home and abroad. To certain of the commission’s proposals, it is possible to make serious The course of international terrorism continues to run along well-established objection. For example, the Lockerbie disaster may have been linked to the July but increasingly meandering lines. Recent developments, all heralded in the 1988 deaths of 290 Iranians from a US warship’s missiles. If so, the idea of international mass media, indicate that terrorism as a media subject still excites sanctioning preventive strikes will only initiate and invite further retaliation and public interest and concern. Daily news reports, new books and articles, and escalation. television programs depict motorboat assaults on Israeli beaches, the cessation of The commission’s report (which fulfills a media dream) is also obviously US diplomatic initiatives toward the PLO, and the latest flaws in TNA, and linked to our emerging concept of low-intensity warfare, replacing the rationale for surveillance techniques designed to promote airline safety. The drama of terrorism US military might now that the Soviet threat is in decline. In this fashion, the media as an indigenous national problem (as with the Basques and the IRA) or as a state- have helped to reconvince taxpayers that they must support the defense budget to supported international movement (as in the case of sanctuary for Red Brigade pacify a mean and scary world. It is a wonder that nowhere in the commission’s 60 leaders in the German Democratic Republic along with safe passage for other recommendations does the report endorse or highlight ideas such as researching the notables, such as the infamous “Carlos,” in Eastern Europe) continues to interest causes of terrorism, using diplomacy, resolving conflicts, negotiating, determining scholars, journalists, and media consumers alike. Members of the Arafat family, peace settlements, or removing the causes of violent discontent while encouraging 300 Russell F. Farnen the spread of economic freedom, social justice, and political democracy. With the course of international rapprochement running so smoothly (if surprisingly) these days, it can only be hoped that the commission report has served its purposes, revived interest in the topic, and allowed us to accept its best motives as our own. It is necessary, however, to improve media channels of communication with governments, publics, and potential terrorist groups to improve our knowledge about causes, solutions, and the mass media’s future role in terrorism as a systemic symbiotic, and symbolic set of phenomena. References Agee, W., et al. (1982). Perspectives on Mass Communications. New York, NY: Harper & Row. Alexander, Y. (Spring/Summer 1978). “Terrorism, the Media, and the Police” in Journal of International Affairs, No. 32. Alexander, Y. and S. Finger (eds.) (1977). Terrorism. New York, NY: John Jay. Altheide, D. (June 1987). “Format and Symbols in TV Coverage of Terrorism in the United States and Great Britain” in International Studies Quarterly, No. 31. Anzovin, S. (ed.) (1986). Terrorism. New York, NY: H. W. Wilson Co. Atwater, T. (March 1988). Network Evening News Coverage of the TWA Hostage Crisis. Boston, MA: Terrorism and the News Media Research Project, Emerson College. Bagdikian, B. (1987). The Media Monopoly. Boston, MA: Beacon Press. Bechelloni, G. (1978). “Il colpa di stato in diretta” in A. Silj (ed.) Brigate Rosse-Stato. Florence, Italy: Valecchi. Bocca, G. (1985). Noi Terroristi. Milan, Italy: Garzanti. Bremer III, L. (March 1987). “Practical Measures for Dealing with Terrorism,” pp. 104 in Department of State Bulletin. Brown, H. (1969). Die, Nigger, Die. New York, NY: Dial Press. Bruck, P. (Winter 1989). “Strategies for Peace, Strategies for News Research,” pp. 111-113 in Journal of Communication, Vol. 39, No. 1. Caserta, J. (1978). The Red Brigades. New York, NY: Manor Books. Chomsky, N. (1988). The Culture of Terorism. Boston, MA: South End Press. Chomsky, N. (1986). Pirates and Emperors: International Terrorism in the Real World. Brattle- boro, VT: Amana Books. Cohen, S. and J. Young (1973). The Manufacture of News. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. Cooper, T. (July 1988). Terrorism and Perspectivist Philosophy. Boston, MA: Terrorism and the News Media Research Project, Emerson College. Crenshaw, M. (1986). “Terrorism: What Shall We Do?” in S. Anzovin (ed.) Terrorism. Bronx, NY: H. W. Wilson. Crenshaw, M. (1987). “The International Consequences of Terrorism,” pp. 4-8 in The Sovereign Citizen, Vol. 2, No. 1. Davies, H. and P. Walton (1983). “Death of a Premier,” p. 40 in H. Davies and P. Walton (eds.) Language, Image, Media. New York, NY: St. Martin’s. Davies, M. (August 20, 1989). “Self-Restraint on Hostage News,” p. 83 in The Hartford Courant. Davies, M. (October 1985). “Mass Media and Televsion.” Speech to Associated Press, San Fran- cisco, CA. 300 Russell F. Farnen Media and Terrorists 301 the spread of economic freedom, social justice, and political democracy. With the Der Derian, J. (1989). “The Importance of Shredding in Earnest: Reading the National Security course of international rapprochement running so smoothly (if surprisingly) these Culture and Terrorism” in I. Angus and S. Jhally (eds.) Cultural Politics in Contemporary days, it can only be hoped that the commission report has served its purposes, America. New York: NY: Routledge. revived interest in the topic, and allowed us to accept its best motives as our own. It Dobkin, B. (1989). “Rhetorical Depiction of Terrorism as an Instrument of U.S. Foreign Policy” in Speech Communication Annual, Vol. 3. is necessary, however, to improve media channels of communication with Dobkin, B. (November 1989). “Terrorism and Media Research: Perspective on the Creation of a governments, publics, and potential terrorist groups to improve our knowledge Public Problem: Perspectives on the Creation of a Public Problem.” Paper prepared for the about causes, solutions, and the mass media’s future role in terrorism as a systemic Speech Communication Association Annual Convention, San Francisco, CA. symbiotic, and symbolic set of phenomena. Freedman, J. and D. Sears (1965). “Selective Exposure,” pp. 58-97 in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, No. 2. References Genovese, M. (1988). “Terrorism,” p. 143 in R. Heibert and G. Reuss (eds.) Impact of Mass Media. New York, NY: Longmans. Agee, W., et al. (1982). Perspectives on Mass Communications. New York, NY: Harper & Row. Gerbner, G. (March 1988). “Violence and Terror in the Mass Media” in Reports and Papers in Alexander, Y. (Spring/Summer 1978). “Terrorism, the Media, and the Police” in Journal of Mass Communications. Paris, France: Unesco. International Affairs, No. 32. Gerbner, I. and G. Gerbner (July 1988). Symbolic Functions of Violence and Terror. Boston, MA: Alexander, Y. and S. Finger (eds.) (1977). Terrorism. New York, NY: John Jay. Terrorism and the News Media Research Project, Emerson College. Altheide, D. (June 1987). “Format and Symbols in TV Coverage of Terrorism in the United States Gitlin, T. (1980). The Whole World is Watching: Media in the Making and Unmaking of the New and Great Britain” in International Studies Quarterly, No. 31. Left. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. Anzovin, S. (ed.) (1986). Terrorism. New York, NY: H. W. Wilson Co. Graber, D. (1989). Mass Media and American Politics (Third ed., rev.). Washington, DC: Con- Atwater, T. (March 1988). Network Evening News Coverage of the TWA Hostage Crisis. Boston, gressional Quarterly Press. MA: Terrorism and the News Media Research Project, Emerson College. Graber, D. (1980). Mass Media and American Politics (First ed.). Washington, DC: Congressional Bagdikian, B. (1987). The Media Monopoly. Boston, MA: Beacon Press. Quarterly Press. Bechelloni, G. (1978). “Il colpa di stato in diretta” in A. Silj (ed.) Brigate Rosse-Stato. Florence, Hacker, F. (1976). Crusaders, Criminals, Crazies. New York, NY: W. W. Norton. Italy: Valecchi. Hamilton, L. and J. Hamilton (March 1983). “Dynamics of Terrorism” in International Studies Bocca, G. (1985). Noi Terroristi. Milan, Italy: Garzanti. Quarterly, No. 27. Bremer III, L. (March 1987). “Practical Measures for Dealing with Terrorism,” pp. 104 in Hickey, N. (July 31 and August 7, 1976). “Terorism and Television,” p. 10 in T.V. Guide. Department of State Bulletin. Hoge, J. (1982). “The Media and Terrorism,” p. 91 in A. Miller (ed.) Terrorism and the Law. Brown, H. (1969). Die, Nigger, Die. New York, NY: Dial Press. Dobbs Ferry, NY: Transnational Publishers. Bruck, P. (Winter 1989). “Strategies for Peace, Strategies for News Research,” pp. 111-113 in Klapper, J. (1960). The Effects of Mass Communications. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press. Journal of Communication, Vol. 39, No. 1. Laqueur, W. (1987). The Age of Terrorism. Boston, MA: Little, Brown. Caserta, J. (1978). The Red Brigades. New York, NY: Manor Books. Laqueur, W. (1977). Terrorism. Boston, MA: Little, Brown. Chomsky, N. (1988). The Culture of Terorism. Boston, MA: South End Press. Laqueur, W. (March 1976). “The Futility of Terrorism” in Harpers. Chomsky, N. (1986). Pirates and Emperors: International Terrorism in the Real World. Brattle- Larson, M. (Spring 1989). “Presidential News Coverage and ‘All Things Considered:’ National boro, VT: Amana Books. Public Radio and News Bias,” p. 351 in Presidential Studies Quarterly, No. 29. Cohen, S. and J. Young (1973). The Manufacture of News. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. Lazarsfeld, P. and R. Merton (1971). “Mass Communication, Popular Taste, and Organized Social Cooper, T. (July 1988). Terrorism and Perspectivist Philosophy. Boston, MA: Terrorism and the Actions,” pp. 554-578 in W. Schramm and D. Roberts (eds.) The Process and Effects of News Media Research Project, Emerson College. Mass Communications. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press. Crenshaw, M. (1986). “Terrorism: What Shall We Do?” in S. Anzovin (ed.) Terrorism. Bronx, Livingstone, N. and T. Arnold (eds.) (1987). Fighting Back. Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath. NY: H. W. Wilson. Livingstone, W. (1987). “Terrorism and the Media Revolution” in N. Livingstone and T. Arnold Crenshaw, M. (1987). “The International Consequences of Terrorism,” pp. 4-8 in The Sovereign (eds.) Fighting Back. Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath. Citizen, Vol. 2, No. 1. Lule, J. (March 1988). The Myth of My Widow. Boston, MA: Terrorism and News Media Davies, H. and P. Walton (1983). “Death of a Premier,” p. 40 in H. Davies and P. Walton (eds.) Research Project, Emerson College. Language, Image, Media. New York, NY: St. Martin’s. Lumley, B. and P. Schlesinger (1982). “The Press, The State, and Its Enemies” in American Davies, M. (August 20, 1989). “Self-Restraint on Hostage News,” p. 83 in The Hartford Courant. Sociological Review, No. 30. Davies, M. (October 1985). “Mass Media and Televsion.” Speech to Associated Press, San Fran- Netanyahu, B. (ed.) (1986). Terrorism: How the West Can Win. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus & cisco, CA. Giroux. Newhouse, J. (July 10, 1989). “Annals of Intelligence (Terrorism),” p. 71 in The New Yorker. 302 Russell F. Farnen Martin, D. and J. Walcott (1988). Best Laid Plans: America’s War Against Terrorism. New York, NY: Harper & Row. Midlarsky, M., M. Crenshaw, and F. Yoshida (June 1980). “Why Violence Spreads: The Contagion of International Terrorism” in International Studies Quarterly, No. 276. Morrison, P. (1986). “Limits to Technocratic Consciousness: Information Technology and Terrorism as Example” in Science: Technology and Human Values, No. 11. Paletz, D., J. Ayanian, and P. Fozzard (1982). “The IRA, The Red Brigades, and the FALN” in New York Times Journal of Communication, No. 2. Paletz, D. and R. Entman (1981). Media Power Politics. New York, NY: The Free Press/MacMillan. Palmerton, P. (1988). “The Rhetoric of Terorism and Media Response to the ‘Crisis in Iran,’” pp. 52, 105-121 in Western Journal of Speech Communication, Vol. 52. Payerhin, M. (1988). “Terrorism and the News Media: The Case of Moro.” Unpublished Master Thesis, Department of Political Science, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT. Picard, R. (July 1988). News Coverage as the Contagion of Terrorism. Boston, MA: Terrorism and the News Media Research Project, Emerson College. Picard, R. and P. Adams (March 1988). Characterizations of Acts and Perpetrators of Political Violence in Three Elite US Daily Newspapers. Boston, MA: Terrorism and the News Media Research Project, Emerson College. Ra’anan, U., et al. (1986). Hydra of Carnage. Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath. Rikhye, I. (1989). The Future of Peacekeeping. New York, NY: International Peace Academy. Robinson, G. (1984). “Television News and the Claim to Facticity,” pp. 199-221 in W. Roland and B. Watkins (eds.) Interpreting Television. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. Rosso, S. (1976). Brigate Rosse. Milan, Italy: Feltrinelli. Rubin, J. (1970). Do It. New York, NY: Ballantine. Rummel, R. (September 1988). “Political Systems, Violence, and War” in USIP Journal, Vol. 1, No. 4. Rusk, Z. (1965). 381 US 1. Washington, DC: United States Supreme Court. Said, E. (1988). “The Essential Terrorist,” pp. 149-158 in E. Said and C. Hutchins (eds.) Blaming the Victims. New York, NY: Verso. Schmid, A. and J. de Graaf (1982). Violence as Communication. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. Sciascia, L. (1978). L’Affaire Moro. Palermo, Italy: Sellorio. Silj, A. (ed.) (1978). Brigate Rosse-Stato. Florence, Italy: Valecchi. Stanley, H. and R. Niemi (1988). Vital Statistics on American Politics. Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly Press. Tan, Z. (1987). “Mass Media and Insurgent Terrorism.” Ph.D. dissertation. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan. T.V. Guide (July 31, 1976). UMI Research Collections Information Service (1989). Terrorism: An International Resource File Brochure. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. US Department of Justice (1976). Task Force on Disorders and Terrorism. Washington, DC: GPO. Wagner-Pacifica, R. (1987). The Moro Mortality Play: Terrorism as Social Drama. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Weimann, G. (1983). “Theater of Terror” in Journal of Communication, No. 43. Wilber, H. (April 1985). “The Role of the Media During a Terrorist Incident,” pp. 20-23 in FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin.