Banal and Magnificent Space in Electra Glide in
Blue (1973), or An Allegory of the Nixon Era
by Mark Shiel
Abstract: Emphasizing the political meanings of cinematic space, this essay
examines the representation of the American West in the unjustly neglected road
movie Electra Glide in Blue (1973) for its telling allegory of the social divisions of
the Nixon era and the temporary infiltration of Hollywood cinema by the 1960s
counterculture.
Cinematic Space in the Sixties. In the United States in the 1960s social and
political discourse were dramatically polarized between bitterly opposed conceptions
of America as a distinctive natural and social space. Key genres in classical
Hollywood cinema—comedy, musicals, and westerns—had in previous decades
articulated the capitalist-utilitarian conception of urban and rural space that dominated
in the twentieth century United States, proliferating in films from Safety
Last (Fred C. Newmeyer and Sam Taylor, 1923) to Funny Face (Stanley Donen,
1956) and from Stagecoach (John Ford, 1939) to How the West Was Won (Ford,
Henry Hathaway, et al., 1962). In such films, the modern American city was signified
by skyscrapers, neon lights, movie palaces, and crowded boulevards. It was an
exciting, physically abundant space in which the natural ambition of the individual
for modest material achievement and romantic love was bound to be fulfilled.
Rural spaces of the American West from the Rio Grande to the plains of Wyoming
were presented as a vast and bountiful garden to be exploited by righteous believers
in a benevolent God. However, during the 1960s, a time of fundamental trans-
formation for the classical Hollywood studio system, alternative conceptions of
space came to the fore in American society, which posed a challenge to the dominant
capitalist-utilitarian conception of America as space and to the types of
motion pictures that Hollywood had traditionally made.
Fostered by the activism of the New Left, Black Power, and the hippie
counterculture, these alternative conceptions of space sought to undermine the
corporate-governmental power structure of the United States. As alternative, or
resistant, conceptions of space, they surfaced primarily in forms or genres that
went against the grain of classical Hollywood and that in time contributed to 
its downfall—for example, in the antipastoral imagery of rural Pennsylvania of
George Romero’s Night of the Living Dead (1968), a horror film allegory of
Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007 91
Mark Shiel is lecturer in Film Studies at King’s College London. His books include the
monograph Italian Neorealism: Rebuilding the Cinematic City (Wallflower Press, 2006) and
the edited volumes Screening the City (Verso, 2003) and Cinema and the City (Blackwell,
2001). He is currently working on a new monograph for Reaktion Books entitled The Real
Los Angeles: Hollywood, Cinema, and the City of Angels.
© 2007 by the University of Texas Press, P.O. Box 7819, Austin, TX 78713-7819
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 91
 contemporary race conflict and the war in Vietnam. In this contentious environment,
the New Left and Black Power were informed by a conception of space
that prioritized engagement with the city as a place of confrontation and political
praxis, but which was almost entirely excluded from Hollywood cinema in the
1960s—with occasional exceptions such as Haskell Wexler’s Medium Cool (1969)
or Michelangelo Antonioni’s Zabriskie Point (1969)—and which was to be found
instead, as David James has explained in Allegories of Cinema, in underground
political films such as the work of the Newsreel collectives.1 The conception of
space underpinning the hippie counterculture, on the other hand, achieved a far
greater prominence in Hollywood cinema, but not in terms of political direct
action as much as anticapitalist escape, individualistic lifestyle experimentation,
and ecological awareness. It amounted to a rejection of the city in favor of the
country, focusing on the rural American West as a countercultural heterotopic
space par excellence, achieving its clearest expression in the road movie that
earned a new level of industrial, formal, and thematic importance within American
cinema as a whole.
It is now the stuff of legend that Dennis Hopper’s Easy Rider, filmed in 1968
and released in 1969, forced a new recognition by Hollywood of countercultural
rebellion as a social phenomenon and cultural theme. Spatially speaking, the film’s
production exemplified the increasing tendency in late 1960s cinema towards
direct filming on location and independent production away from the established
institutions of Hollywood. Thematically and stylistically, the film exemplified the
assertive countercultural conception of space of the day, rejecting inhuman modernization
and rationalistic capitalism, focusing on the countryside and the wilder-
ness, taking a phenomenological pleasure in the sheer fact of motion itself, and
mapping a new human society, by means of a rejuvenated pastoral form and
iconography.2 The strongest feature of this mapping was the film’s transcontinental,
linear narrative running from west to east across the United States and split-
ting the country into two distinct geographical regions, each with its own moral
and political signification. As the two hippie protagonists, Wyatt and Billy (Peter
Fonda and Dennis Hopper), traveled from Southern California through Arizona
and New Mexico to Texas in the first half of the film, the difficulties posed by hippie
society’s idealist disengagement were suggested in the film’s portrait of a
struggling hippie commune. The overwhelming beauty of the landscape and the
opportunity for self-fulfillment the commune stood for supported an extended
vision of utopian pastoral escape that was at once invigorating and defiant. This
vision was eventually overturned by the altogether more sinister beauty and
dystopian connotations of the Deep South, specifically Louisiana, where Wyatt
and Billy met violent deaths at the hands of bigoted rednecks. Their deaths appeared
as a powerful condemnation of the moral corruption of “straight” America
and an affirmation of the righteousness of countercultural escape.
When it was released in the spring of 1969, Easy Rider was acclaimed for its
unflinching anticipation of a future of seemingly perpetual and ever-intensifying
92 Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 92
 violent social conflict in America. Penelope Gilliatt, writing in the New Yorker,
described the film as “ninety-four minutes of what it is like to swing, to watch, to
be fond, to hold opinions, and to get killed in America at this moment.”3 As such,
Easy Rider’s thematizing of countercultural escape within the contested rural
spaces of the continental United States acknowledged the key social and political
conditions of the day. These included the intensification of the Vietnam War and
its generation of a broad-based popular movement of antiwar resistance led by the
New Left, the eclipse of the liberal race politics of the Civil Rights era by the
increasingly assertive left-leaning politics of Black Power, and the deepening skepticism,
if not hostility, of many American youth towards the spiritual emptiness and
moral corruption of consumer capitalism and conventional party politics, epitomized
by the presidencies of Lyndon B. Johnson and, from the beginning of 1969,
Richard M. Nixon. The cataclysmic deaths of the protagonists in Easy Rider not only
echoed the very recent real-life assassinations that cut short the lives of many of
the nation’s most inspiring leaders (President John F. Kennedy, Malcolm X, Martin
Luther King, and Robert Kennedy), but crystallized the intense disgust and defiance
of the counterculture with the social, political, and moral status quo of the day.
This disgust and defiance intensified and mutated in the early years of the
1970s. As Fredric Jameson has convincingly argued, the Sixties ended not with the
official beginning of the new decade but later, in 1973 or 1974, as the United States
withdrew from Vietnam, the so-called Silent Majority of conservative Americans
backing President Nixon consolidated into the New Right, leftist activism and the
counterculture went into decline, and the U.S. and global economy slipped inexorably
into recession.4 These conditions would become apparent in a subtle and
gradual change of tone in American cinema in the early to mid 1970s. Horror films
such as Brian De Palma’s Sisters (1973) continued that genre’s distinctive subversion
of social order, but the defiant and assertive escapism of the counterculture
was increasingly supplanted by a tone of resignation and reconciliation in a range
of films from George Lucas’s teenage melodrama American Graffiti (1973) and
Francis Ford Coppola’s conspiracy thriller The Conversation (1974) to Hal Ashby’s
romantic comedy Shampoo (1975). This change of tone was even evident in the
road movie, that genre which had been most firmly stamped with countercultural
credentials. The escapism that had underpinned Easy Rider and other biker
movies in the late 1960s continued in the early years of the following decade in
Two-Lane Blacktop (Monte Hellman, 1971), Vanishing Point (Richard C.
Sarafian, 1971), and The Getaway (Sam Peckinpah, 1972), but it was compromised
by an increasing mood of reflection and regret already evident in Five Easy
Pieces (Bob Rafelson, 1971) and The Last Detail (Hal Ashby, 1972), and intensified
in Thunderbolt and Lightfoot (Michael Cimino, 1974) and Electra Glide in
Blue (James William Guercio, 1973). In the latter two films in particular, the violent
deaths of the protagonists appeared not as a sign of revolutionary countercul-
tural defiance in the face of an unjust America, as it had done in Easy Rider, but
as the tragic outcome of needless social conflict in a fundamentally good society.
Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007 93
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 93
 “The flip-side of Easy Rider.” This is nowhere clearer than in Electra Glide in
Blue (1973), a film that has received remarkably little critical attention despite its
thematic complexity and stylistic sophistication. As I will argue in the following
pages, the film wearily acknowledges the intensification of social conflict that
marked the Nixon years while introducing a renewed interest in social reconciliation
and the mediation of conflict that anticipates the era of post-Vietnam recon-
struction (which was nowhere to be seen in Easy Rider). Electra Glide in Blue
revolves around the figure of John Wintergreen (Robert Blake), a motorcycle
highway patrol officer in rural Arizona for whom a murder case offers an opportunity
for promotion from the humdrum life of the beat to the cherished status of
detective.
As I will demonstrate, the film’s thematic preoccupations are articulated
through significant uses of cinematic space and, in particular, through a reconfiguration
of the spatial geometry that underpinned Easy Rider’s countercultural
defiance. Indeed, according to the film’s writer and executive producer, Rupert
Hitzig, the film was conceived in large part as “the flip-side of Easy Rider.”5 It
implicitly relied, in a positive sense, on the model of the earlier film for much of
its meaning and emotive power, interrogating self-consciously and often with a
hint of irony not only the brutality and corruption of straight America, but also the
countercultural escapism of which Easy Rider was seen as the most powerful
expression by American cinema audiences of the era.
Moving away from motifs of escape towards motifs of resignation, Electra
Glide in Blue recharacterizes the gigantic, horizontal geometry of the American
West characteristic of Easy Rider as little more than a flat plane upon which characters
find themselves constantly restricted rather than liberated. Placing
Monument Valley at the center of its mise en scène, Electra Glide in Blue conveys
a compound form of what film historian Robert B. Ray has described as the sense
of “lateness” in much 1970s American cinema, recognizing the obsolescence of the
nostalgic freedom and moralism of the Old West but adding to this another more
fatalistic recognition of the obsolescence of countercultural dissent at the end of
the Nixon era.6 This recognition of an emerging post-Sixties environment is
inscribed in motifs of restriction, mortality, and the inevitable passing of time, a
recognition of the “brick wall” of economic recession, and of the social polarization
of straight America and the counterculture as the new and perpetually
destructive default organization of society.
Electra Glide in Blue relies throughout on a striking contrast between indoor,
enclosed, private spaces and outdoor, exposed, public spaces. Indoor sequences
are typically shot in tightly composed close-ups. In counterpoint we find dramatic
cuts to and from the exteriority and expansiveness of Monument Valley, filmed
in Panavision. Indoors, the camera typically pans or tracks slowly, concentrating on
the details of walls, surfaces, objects, and human faces. In the opening scene, for
example, we witness the suicide/murder of Frank—an old hobo who lives in a
shack in the desert—which serves as the pretext for the subsequent detective nar94
Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 94
 rative. The interior of the shack and its occupant are filmed without any establishing
shot and only in extreme close-ups in which we never see Frank in full figure.
Instead, in close-up we see a set of false teeth, a hand, a frying pan, an old gramophone,
and a shotgun. This disarticulated sequence is then followed by a dramat-
ic cut to Monument Valley in which the space is presented as a coherent whole of
vast dimensions. The natural stillness and silence of Monument Valley are subsequently
violated by a speeding psychedelic VW van that shoots in from the hori-
zon and off to the left, rudely puncturing the timelessness of wilderness space with
a reminder of the modern (figure 1).
Next, the action turns to the motorcycle cop Wintergreen’s apartment. Again
the camera stops presenting a simple establishing shot of the interior and proceeds
instead to pan slowly along the walls of the apartment in close-up—
pictures on the wall, a gun and holster hanging in the kitchen—and then to film
Wintergreen’s preparations for the day ahead with a series of close-ups of isolated
actions—Wintergreen lifting weights, breaking eggs for breakfast, and popping
vitamin pills. To the accompaniment of the opening credits and soundtrack, each
simple movement becomes a miniature set piece: Wintergreen puts on his jacket
and his belt, then grabs his keys, baton, gun, and helmet—each action punctuated
by a momentary freeze-frame and complemented by the stop-and-go rhythm
of the music. Only after several minutes, as he is fully dressed and ready to go on
morning parade, do we get the first full shot of Wintergreen in his uniform, but
even then the shot is not a simple establishing shot but a double exposure in which
an interior shot becomes an exterior shot as a garage door rises and opens to the
sunlight of the desert as Wintergreen walks portentously into the outdoor space of
the American West (figure 2). The pattern of strong contrasts between interior
scenes filmed in restrictive close-ups and exterior scenes filmed panoramically is
maintained throughout the film as we follow Wintergreen’s beat in the desert sun
to the station house or the local bar at night. When Wintergreen and his partner,
Zipper (Billy “Green” Bush), retire at the end of the working day to play pool in a
Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007 95
Figure 1. A psychedelic VW van speeds through Monument Valley at the
opening of Electra Glide in Blue (United Artists, 1973).
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 95
 local saloon, the scene derives a symbolic interiority from the exteriority of the
Arizona wilderness outside. Even the jukebox plays the melancholy country song
“I’m looking at the world from a bottle…”
The prevailing sense of restriction constructed by these contrasts is underlined
by Wintergreen and Zipper’s lack of interest in the beauty of the Western
wilderness. Where in Easy Rider the experience of the road, of Nature, and of the
Old West appeared as a form of countercultural tourism, characterized by a highly
self-conscious appreciation and exploration of the external environment, in
Electra Glide in Blue, these things are experienced by Wintergreen and Zipper
only as work and routine. Not only do they not share the determined appreciation
of the wilderness characteristic of Billy and Wyatt in Easy Rider, they do not comment
on it at all. Their relationship to it is perhaps best signified by Zipper’s pref-
erence for reading science fiction comics in the shade on a desert hilltop, where
his concentration on the pages before him excludes the space around him. In
Electra Glide in Blue, the road becomes circular, banal, and professional rather
than a means of escape. Wintergreen’s motorcycle reminds him only of his underachievement
in life, his restriction to the lowest ranks of the police force. His rela-
tionship to Nature and the West is conditioned by his labor. Where Easy Rider
describes constant frisson, with each day beginning and ending at a different
point, Electra Glide in Blue describes only ennui, beginning and ending the day in
the same place.
The contrast between movement as leisure and movement as labor is clear
in the contrast between the opening soundtrack of Easy Rider, in which
Steppenwolf’s famous hard rock anthem “Born to Be Wild” incites the spectator
to “get your motor running, get out on the highway…,” and John Wintergreen’s
expression of his attitude to movement and work in Electra Glide in Blue, which
he explains one day to Zipper: “I hate that motorcycle they make me ride.”
The circularity and banality of the road narrative in Electra Glide in Blue is
substantially due to the profession of the film’s protagonist, Wintergreen; he is a
96 Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007
Figure 2. Motorcycle cop John Wintergreen prepares to go on morning
parade in Electra Glide in Blue (United Artists, 1973).
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 96
 motorcycle police officer who is clearly not a man of leisure as are the protagonists
of Easy Rider. His experience of the open space of the West is constrained by his
daily implication in the economically and politically conservative spatial and temporal
matrices of urban modernity, symbolized by the highway network on which
he cruises for his living. The film professionalizes the road and makes it humdrum
in a way that registers both the deflation of the utopian aspirations of the 1960s
counterculture and the decline of the American economy from postwar boom
(1945 to 1968) to the economic recession whose first signs emerged in 1969 but
which intensified throughout the 1970s. 
The economic boom contributed to a new social and political importance of
American youth in the 1960s, while the economic recession of the 1970s contributed
to the demise of youth dissent in so far as recession put the brakes on the
progressive social spending programs of the so-called “Great Society” and encouraged
a relatively conservative preoccupation among 1970s youth with the immedi-
ate problems of finding and maintaining employment.7 In response, Electra Glide
in Blue reconfigures in an appropriately restricted manner the hedonistic cinematographic
relationship between spectator and protagonist that prevailed in Easy
Rider. The earlier film’s innovation was to use a highly mobile camera to make the
spectator travel cinematographically with the protagonists of the film on their
odyssey across America, seeing the country at the same pace and from parallel perspectives.
This constructed an indulgent and sensorily fulfilling dialogue between
the mobile subject and the magnificence of Nature, articulating the radical agendas
of the counterculture. In contrast, the camera does not position the spectator
in this way in Electra Glide in Blue. Instead, the film is dominated by a comparatively
conservative cinematographic approach in which the camera remains large-
ly static even while filming the expansive beauty of the West, becoming mobile
only during occasional scenes of a police chase (in which the mobility of the camera
is not “for fun,” so to speak, but serves a more traditional, generic function—
the dramatic pursuit of a criminal by law and order). In this sense, the film’s cinematographic
style articulates the collapse of the escapist fantasy of Easy Rider
where both the spectator and protagonists were allowed and encouraged to enjoy
the beauty and exhilaration of the West. Electra Glide in Blue, in contrast, alienates
the spectator from the protagonists of the film in so far as the spectator is
allowed to enjoy the West through cinematography, while the protagonists cannot.
Simultaneously, Electra Glide in Blue represents the small-town environment
of the film—the fictional “Stockburn”8—as an isolated and static space that is
threatened and invaded by the social and political conflicts of the day, which, it is
suggested, are destabilizing the nation as a whole. To use the film historian
Thomas Schatz’s term, the mythological simplicity and purity of the space of the
West becomes “ideologically contested” against its will, corrupted by modern
America’s ongoing war between counterculture and straight society.9 This motif
of corruption appears not only in the VW van’s striking invasion of the mythical
“emptiness” of the Arizona desert in the opening sequence, but underpins the
Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007 97
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 97
 narrative as a whole insofar as criminality is mapped as a primarily urban phenomenon
that tends to migrate to, and disrupt, the open space of the West. The rude
shattering of the rural idyll of Monument Valley by the noisy entrance of the psychedelic
VW van sets this mapping in motion. The VW van transports hippies to
the desert from the city, and through the desert from city to city, and eventually
transpires to be involved in the trafficking of drugs. The hippies who come to the
desert to hang out befriend the old hobo Frank, prompting Frank’s companion,
the mountain man Willy, to kill Frank in a mad fit of jealousy and resentment.
Frank’s murder traumatizes the local community and baffles the local police. The
murder leads to the corruption of Wintergreen’s partner, Zipper, when Zipper
secretly recovers cash from Frank’s cabin and uses it to purchase the custom
motorcycle of his dreams. Wintergreen discovers Zipper’s corruption, prompting
a fistfight and then a gunfight that results in Zipper’s death. By the end of the film,
the death of the old hobo Frank in a lonely shack in the desert has extended into
a litany of alienation and tragic killing (all traceable back to an urban cause and the
modern conflict of hippie and straight society). Where many contemporary commentators
diagnosed the urbanization of the western in Dirty Harry (Don Siegel,
1971) and Death Wish (Michael Winner, 1974) as a conservative remobilization of
traditional values in the Nixon era, Electra Glide in Blue urbanizes the western in
a relatively progressive way, not transposing its codes to a modern urban setting
but transposing 1960s urban conflict to the rural space of the West whose openness
and ostensible simplicity it transgresses.10
The transgression of the West is inscribed in Electra Glide in Blue in the cast
of characters who pass through small-town Arizona but do not stay: the VW van
driven by the hippie Dave, a speeding LA cop vacationing with his girlfriend, a
Vietnam-veteran trucker who cannot hold down a job, and kids from the city visiting
the desert for a weekend concert. All of these constitute mobile urban
ciphers on their way from one point in that matrix to another, temporarily sojourning
outside the limits of the city but returning to it on a regular basis. This motif
of “motion-through” contributes to the film’s narrativization of the rapid social
change that engrossed the desert southwest in the 1960s. As the historian D. W.
Meinig has explained, one of the most important determinants of the dramatic
modernization of Arizona in the post-WWII era was its geographical proximity to,
and its location on the westward routeways to, the massive urban-industrial hubs
of California that agglomerated with new energy around the cities of San Diego
and, especially, Los Angeles.11 In Electra Glide in Blue, the representation of the
invasion of the rural space of the West by the sociopolitical divisions and moral
corruption of the Nixon era presents an allegory of the continuous incorporation
of the historically empty space of the small town and the wilderness into the structures
of modern urban America. While not actually present as a setting in the film,
urban California—and particularly Los Angeles—is present everywhere in the
film as a structuring absence. Electra Glide in Blue was based on the real-life
killing of a motorcycle police officer by migrating hippies in Phoenix, Arizona, on
98 Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 98
 November 11, 1968—the first time in fifty-two years that a police officer was
killed in the line of duty in that city. A local newspaper editorial reported the
killing as a sign of a “black cloud” that was “sweeping” into rural Arizona from the
nation’s cities.12
Along with Southern California, Arizona experienced rapid growth after 1950
in terms of population, urbanization, and economic modernization. While the
state’s traditional agricultural base remained important, growing from $365 million
to $574 million in output from 1952 to 1967, employment in agriculture declined
and employment in construction, manufacturing, and services increased.13 The
value of Arizona’s manufacturing sector quadrupled from $231 million per year in
1952 to $919 million in 1967, fuelled by the expansion of high-technology industries
such as electronics, aerospace, and defense.14 Scottsdale, on the northeast
fringe of Phoenix, emerged as of one of fifty-three new “boomburbs,” to use urban
historian Robert Lang’s term, which experienced “double-digit growth” throughout
the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, and the majority of which were located in the
American southwest—twenty-five in California and seven in Arizona itself.15
The Old and the Modern West. The representation of the invasion of the
desert by the conflicts of the 1960s in Electra Glide in Blue is a function of this
modernization and is reinforced by a recognition of the American West in the
modern age as fragile, human, and mortal. This recognition was featured increasingly
in classical Hollywood after World War II in “adult westerns” such as The
Gunfighter (Henry King, 1950) and The Misfits (John Huston, 1961), which characterized
the western cowboy as an ageing anachronism. By the later 1960s, revi-
sion of the western catered to mainly youth audiences who were fundamentally
disillusioned with what many saw as the masculinist, racist, and materialist values
of the genre in its heyday. Cat Ballou (Elliot Silverstein, 1965), The Wild Bunch
(Sam Peckinpah, 1969), Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (George Roy Hill,
1969), and The Ballad of Cable Hogue (Sam Peckinpah, 1970) effected change in
the most fundamental symbolic and iconic vocabulary of the Hollywood cinema,
repositioning the heroic rural vision of the western as something flawed and hopelessly
obsolete. Hombre (Martin Ritt, 1967), Little Big Man (Arthur Penn, 1970),
Tell Them Willie Boy Is Here (Abraham Polonsky, 1970, also starring Robert
Blake), and Ulzana’s Raid (Robert Aldrich, 1972) revealed the supposed “settlement”
and “civilizing” of the American West as a process of military conquest, cul-
tural imperialism, and environmental destruction, which bore clear parallels with
the ongoing war in Vietnam. Dennis Hopper’s The Last Movie (1971) created an
entirely new intersection between the western genre and experimental film by
using extremely discontinuous montage and self-reflexive narrative to recount the
destructive clash of modern and traditional cultures prompted by the shooting of
a Hollywood western on location in rural Peru.
The strongest “outside” influence on this sea change in the symbolic meaning
and potential of the western was the highly successful 1967 U.S. release of the
Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007 99
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 99
 semiparodic, semioperatic “spaghetti western” trilogy of Italian director Sergio
Leone—A Fistful of Dollars (1964), For a Few Dollars More (1964), and The
Good, the Bad, and the Ugly (1966)—which altered forever the visual and mythological
landscape of the western genre and the codes that governed its represen-
tation of sex and violence. This revisionist bent in the American western was
evident in subsequent films like Clint Eastwood’s Hang ’em High (1967) and Two
Mules for Sister Sara (1971), and Sam Peckinpah’s Pat Garret and Billy the Kid
(1973). These films presented the American West as an unforgivingly violent arena
of self-interested materialistic conflict in which moral propriety was hypocrisy and
social order was always collapsing back into anarchy and wilderness.
This revisionism was counterbalanced even in the 1960s by a continuing
attachment to the cinematic mythologizing of the American West to which films
as different as the conservative western True Grit (Henry Hathaway, 1969) and the
road movie Easy Rider contributed, albeit to radically different ideological ends.
But Electra Glide in Blue goes further than most films of the era in accentuating
the West as fragile, temporalizing it, and attempting, as it were, to drag it down out
of the clouds of the mythical. This rendering implies not only the “lateness” of the
West in modern America but the lateness of the counterculture too.
The recognition of the human mortality and essential pastness of the West is
represented in the characters of Frank and Willy who appear to live lives in the
desert akin to those of prospectors or trappers of former times. The two old-timers
are elderly, frail, senile, physically isolated, and hopelessly anachronistic. The decision
to set the film’s first scene in Frank’s old cabin in the desert ensures that the
Old West, the ideal of the homestead, the pioneer, and the open range are immediately
evoked. An old saloon piano tune plays on the gramophone—both the
gramophone itself and the pathos of the music it plays suggesting a lost past. This
“homestead” is a ramshackle and decrepit shack. The atmosphere is one of stillness
and old age. Where Easy Rider invoked the ideal of the self-made man work-
ing his own land as a model for countercultural self-sufficiency, in Electra Glide in
Blue the archetypes of the West are only withered and pitiful anachronisms in
modern America. Like his companion Frank, the Old West grown feeble before
our eyes appears in the character of Willy, played by Elisha Cook Jr., then a 
seventy-year-old veteran of classical Hollywood films from Tin Pan Alley (Walter
Lang, 1940) and The Maltese Falcon (John Huston, 1941) to The Big Sleep
(Howard Hawks, 1946) and Shane (George Stevens, 1953). Willy’s only response
to what he sees as the bewildering confusion of modern life is to take refuge on
the Superstition Mountain where, he claims defiantly, he knows places where
nobody has ever been. As David Lavender explained in his history of the southwestern
states, published in 1980, the rapid postwar development of the region
“still leaves old-timers shaking their heads,” having “hurtled the region into an
urban-industrial economy as sophisticated and as troublesome as any in the
nation.”16 While the old men who drink at the local bar react to the massive and
radical modernization of their environment with silent resignation and retreat to
100 Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 100
 “[look] at the world from a bottle,” Willy reacts with demented panic and the
insanity of protracted loneliness (figure 3).
Even the film’s grand opening panorama of Monument Valley appears first as
a shot in black and white before turning gradually to color. The shot presents in
microcosm a summary history of the Hollywood western. A sense of loss is reinforced
by the film’s theme music—an emotive brass score, solemn and reverent,
sorrowful and elegiac. With the disruptive entrance of the psychedelic VW van,
Electra Glide in Blue mocks the generic connotations of its own setting, initially
suggesting itself as a western only to immediately destabilize both the iconography
of the western and the spectator’s conditioned response to the cinematography of
the West. In this way, the film establishes a pattern of promise and denial that will
persist throughout its narrative, reminding the spectator of the comforting myths
of the Old West while denying him/her their reassurance and refusing to provide
any compensation for their loss in the present day.
The sense of the Old West as irrecoverably past is heightened by the next
scene, which shows Wintergreen and Jolene in bed together in the morning. As
the couple makes love in the background, the camera slowly pans to a U.S. flag
and a portrait of an Indian tracker hung on Wintergreen’s wall. Wintergreen kisses
his lover good-bye and prepares for the day ahead, first with a glass of raw eggs,
chin-ups, and vitamin pills, and then meticulously dressing for work in an ironic
counterpoint to the sheriff of the Old West. The sense of the everyday provides a
deflating counterpoint with the extraordinary western-style opening sequences.
When Wintergreen arrives at the police station, the gleaming chrome on rows of
Harley-Davidson motorcycles and the mock epithets that the sergeant shouts at
his officers “in preparation for the concert this weekend,” all serve to highlight
the thorough modernity of the narrative context: “You honky! You pinko! You pig!
You fag!”
Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007 101
Figure 3. The insanity of protracted loneliness—Wintergreen and his partner
Zipper calm the mountain man Willy in Electra Glide in Blue (United
Artists, 1973).
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 101
 At the same time, if Electra Glide in Blue allows little recourse to the comforting
myths of America’s Western past, it at least respects them. Its representa-
tion of modern America, on the other hand, both straight and countercultural, is
almost wholly negative. The film’s description of the overt and hidden processes
of modernization in the rural Southwest is matched by a multifaceted detailing of
the difficult social and political conditions prevailing in the United States at the
time of its production. These include the impact of economic recession, the consolidation
of the Silent Majority, the prioritization of strong law and order by
President Richard Nixon, the continuation of war seemingly without end in
Vietnam, and the wane of the counterculture. By 1973, these economic, social, and
political realities conspired to produce a widespread and cumulative sense of
national weariness.
Recession and Law and Order. From the production of Easy Rider in 1968 to
that of Electra Glide in Blue in 1973, U.S. economic conditions worsened dramatically
into bona fide recession thanks to record inflation, which spiraled from 4.2
to 8.8 percent, a rise in unemployment from 3.3 to 5.5 percent, government debt
that grew from $345 million to $457 million and record annual federal budget
deficits ($25 billion in 1968, decreasing somewhat but remaining critical at $15 billion
in 1973).17 These developments were partly a legacy of the so-called “guns and
butter” liberalism of the Johnson presidency (1963–1969), which had overoptimistically
committed the federal government to massive spending both on military
action in Southeast Asia and on the social improvements of the Great Society at
home (for example, federal funding of housing and urban development, antipoverty
initiatives such as the Community Action Program, and the founding of
Medicare and Medicaid).18 The collapse of the Johnson administration in 1968,
prompted by the failure of the United States to make significant military gains in
Vietnam, led to an “existential” crisis of American liberalism that left the way open
for the rise of Richard Nixon. As political historian Marshall Berman has described
it, both the frontier mentality liberalism of the 1960s, epitomized by the Kennedy
and Johnson presidencies, and the experimental projects of the counterculture
ground to a halt in a recession that was not only economic but also emotional, and
that was compounded by the retrenchment of the conservative Right.19
Nixon’s victory in the 1968 presidential campaign, buoyed by the so-called
“Silent Majority” of conservative Americans (a phrase Nixon first used in his
address to the nation on November 3, 1969), represented a rejection of the eightyear-old
Democratic program of expansion in domestic and foreign commitments.
The first and second Nixon administrations (1969–1972, 1973–1974) prioritized a
measured but militarily robust withdrawal from Vietnam (“Peace with Honor”)
and, at home, a restriction of federal spending on the social programs of the Great
Society matched by a rise in federal spending on the maintenance of law and
order.20 This strategy did not turn around the economy: an annual trade deficit
was announced in 1971 for the first time since the end of the nineteenth century
102 Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 102
 and was followed by a temporary freeze on wages and prices, the withdrawal of the
dollar from the international gold standard and its forced devaluation, and the oil
crisis that enveloped the nation in October 1973.21
The Nixon administration’s emphasis on law and order, however, did bring
with it a proactive prosecution of countercultural, New Left, and Black Power dissent,
and an aggressive approach to the use of policing and intelligence power that
would culminate in the Watergate scandal of 1972–1974.22 As John Mitchell,
Attorney General under Nixon from 1969 to 1972, declared: “This country is going
so far to the right you won’t recognize it.”23 The ideological terrain of American
public life experienced a new degree of polarization between the left and right
while the liberal “center” was thrown deeper into disarray. For the left, in particular,
this led to increased disillusion and internal conflict, as well as to more fre-
quent and violent confrontations with the law and order apparatuses of the State.
The objective realities of policing the United States had been growing more
difficult throughout the post-WWII era, which was characterized by a general
expansion of the scale and powers of law enforcement agencies and the judicial
and penal systems. Federal spending on criminal justice as a percentage of U.S.
Gross National Product  (GNP) doubled from 0.5 percent in 1955 to 1.0 percent
($10.5 billion) in 1971.24 But this expansion was particularly dramatic during the
Nixon era when spending on criminal justice as a percentage of U.S. GNP
increased from 1.0 percent ($10.5 billion) to 1.4 percent ($15.0 billion) from 1971
to 1974 alone.25 Over the same short period, federal spending on the judicial system
grew by 62 percent and on policing by 52 percent, while the number of police
nationally grew 13.6 percent, from 575,000 to 653,000 personnel.26 Much of this
growth took place in response to long-term trends: the annual incidence of crime
per thousand of the U.S. population grew from 1.1 in 1957 to 5.9 in 1977, and the
annual incidence of serious crime grew 158 percent from 1960 to 1971.27 But this
objective growth was outpaced by an increasing prominence of crime and, therefore,
law and order as a structuring factor in the public consciousness. Crime was
identified by 4 percent of Americans as the most urgent public issue in 1948. The
percentage rose dramatically to 21 percent in 1972.28
The notable growth of the state apparatus of law and order in the Nixon era,
and of law and order as a public concern, ushered in the heyday of the police officer
as dramatic protagonist. On television, McCloud (1970–1977), Police Story
(1973–1977), Kojak (1973–1978), and other new prime time shows brought law
and order into the private home and the public eye with an unprecedented everyday
regularity.29 In cinema, law and order was the central theme in Bullitt (Peter
Yates, 1968), Coogan’s Bluff (Don Siegel, 1968), The French Connection (William
Friedkin, 1971), and Magnum Force (Ted Post, 1973), as noted with deep misgivings
by such critics as Pauline Kael in the New Yorker and David Denby 
in Harper’s.30
With a strong hint of irony, public fascination with the materiality and power
of the police unit informs the opening sequences of Electra Glide in Blue where
Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007 103
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 103
 Wintergreen’s donning of his uniform, the leather and steel textures of the police
motorcycle, and the militarism of the highway patrol on morning parade are
methodical in a manner that connotes professional competence. But Wintergreen’s
solemn “dressing up” is also fetishistic in a manner more in keeping with the
antiauthoritarian aesthetics and politics of underground filmmaker Kenneth
Anger to whose film Scorpio Rising (1963) Electra Glide in Blue pays implicit
tribute (figure 4).
Electra Glide in Blue postdates Anger’s film by ten years of bitter confrontation
between counterculture and the State, and it is the product of a moment in
history far removed from the peaceful protest sit-ins of the Civil Rights era or the
1967 Summer of Love. Crucial to the growth of public concern with criminality in
the 1960s was the rise of new forms of political protest. Peaceful sit-ins had given
way to the mass mobilizations of the antiwar movement, inner-city riots, and
armed revolutionary cadres. The representation of the police and hippie counterculture
in the film registers the hardening of attitudes that overcame both sides
throughout the era, especially at the peak of the antiwar movement in the
“Mobilization” and “Moratorium” demonstrations in October 1967 and November
1969, respectively, and then in the protests following the shooting dead of four students
by the Ohio National Guard at a demonstration at Kent State University in
May 1970. The film draws attention to the blurring of the concepts of criminality,
on the one hand, and resistance and dissent, on the other, which constituted official
policy in the Nixon era when the FBI’s COINTELPRO (Counter Intelligence
Program, 1956–1971) and the CIA’s CHAOS program (1959–1974) and Project
Resistance (1967–1973) were deployed against radical groups such as the Black
Panther Party, Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), Weatherman, and the
Yippies.31
The 1960s saw six million Americans participate in political protest, resulting
in 100,000 arrests, 12,000 injuries, and 350 deaths.32 Political violence was serious
and real, but 80 percent of the incidents of political protest passed off peacefully.
104 Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007
Figure 4. The materiality and power of the police unit—Harley-Davidson
Electra Glide motorcycles in Electra Glide in Blue (United Artists, 1973).
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 104
 The death rate from political protest, at 18.3 per ten million population per year,
was always substantially lower than the 580 deaths per ten million of the population
due to murder or the 2700 deaths per ten million due to road accidents. The
widespread sense of crisis and threat prompted within the dominant culture, but
especially among conservatives, was explored by Atlantic Monthly magazine in
October 1970 under the semi-ironic headline “The Army is the only damn thing
holding this country together.”33 In fact, as Hugh Graham and Ted Gurr explain
in Violence in America, the threat from armed radical groups such as the Black
Panther Party was well-contained:
…most terrorist attacks on whites seem to have been carried out by free-lancers…and
the Panthers, outnumbered and outgunned, lost their handful of dramatic confrontations
with the police.34
Despite this reality, in prominent American crime films of the era, responsibility
for the country’s social, political, and moral crisis was often placed on the
shoulders of the black community and the counterculture: in Don Siegel’s Dirty
Harry, the protagonist, Detective Harry Callahan (Clint Eastwood), begins the
film by dramatically intervening against a gang of African American bank robbers
with his .357 Magnum, famously challenging one of them to “Go ahead, make my
day.”; and a serial killer hippie sporting a peace symbol is allowed to roam free by
a left-liberal establishment based in San Francisco City Hall and the University of
California Berkeley.
In Electra Glide in Blue, a confusion of criminality and dissent mirroring that
of the Nixon administration and the Silent Majority is evident in the unshakeable
belief of Wintergreen’s megalomaniac superior officer, Detective Harve Poole
(Mitch Ryan), that the hippie counterculture is dedicated to a program of “systematic
police genocide.” Through Poole the film provides a critique of that confusion
achieved by only a small number of other films of the era, such as John G.
Avildsen’s Joe (1970). Poole’s tough masculinity, inviting comparison with the vigilante
aggression evident in Dirty Harry, The French Connection (1971), Magnum
Force (1973), and Death Wish (1974), is underpinned by his sense of supreme
moral and professional infallibility—epitomized by his declaration, “My religion is
myself. When I talk to myself, the whole world is listening”—and by his predisposition
towards reactionary, sudden violence and his vocal contempt for the coun-
terculture and the liberal legal establishment. As Harve explains to some hippies
from whom he is trying to extract information about the supposed dope dealer
Bob Zemko:
In the interests of ‘police-community relations’, I don’t want to have to shoot anybody
today…
But this moral and physical self-importance is decisively undercut three times.
First, when he is promoted to detective by Harve, Wintergreen repeats his
fetishistic dressing-up in uniform of the opening sequences, but this time in a crisp
tan suit, stetson, cowboy boots, and cigar, strutting proudly on his front porch, only
Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007 105
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 105
 to realize he has forgotten to put on his pants. Second, Jolene, Wintergreen’s
sometime lover but also Harve’s steady girlfriend, ridicules Harve’s middle-aged
impotence in a fit of drunken melancholy set off by her disillusion with her smalltown
life as a bartender and nostalgia for her youth as a chorus-line starlet. Third,
towards the end of the film, Wintergreen explodes Harve’s theory that drug-dealing
hippies must have been responsible for Frank’s murder and lashes out at his
egoism and prejudice with the words, “All I care about is that you were wrong…
You’re full of horseshit, Harve!”
For their part, hippies in Electra Glide in Blue appear to share the sense of
cynical fatigue that dominates the demeanor, attitudes, actions, and words of many
of the film’s major and minor characters. In an environment in which police brutality
has become the norm, they appear lethargic, unable to communicate or
defend themselves, and lacking pride and productivity in their alternative way of
life. Where Easy Rider emphasized the dedicated labor and celebration of the hippie
commune and its creation of a natural refuge from urban-industrial space, at
the commune that Harve Poole and Wintergreen visit during their investigation
hippies live a life of unmotivated squalor among ruined outbuildings overflowing
with pig shit.
The open conflict between hippie counterculture and straight society is further
developed in the film around the issue of “police-community relations,” a hot-
button issue of the day that grew out of the liberal attempt in the 1960s to mediate
between the policing demands of an increasingly violent and fractured society, on
the one hand, and an accelerating public concern with the rights of individuals, on
the other. Contemporary discourse on police-community relations—including,
most famously, President Johnson’s Commission on the Causes and Prevention of
Violence—focused on the perceived lack of accountability of the police and the
mutual alienation of police, youth, and minorities, particularly in the aftermath of
such events as the 1968 Chicago Democratic convention.35 However, reform
proved persistently difficult to implement, particularly due to resistance among
police officers who were increasingly subject to physical attack in their work,
police who felt that the judicial system was too lenient on criminals, and police
who saw themselves outflanked by a largely liberal (some said “anti-American”)
judicial system and a dangerous counterculture. These circumstances increasingly
led to instances of police harassment, corruption, career alienation, and intense
frustration on the job. As the sociologist Albert J. Reiss has pointed out, a significant
proportion of police in the late 1960s came to support, and were perceived to
support, radical right politics.36
In this context, John Wintergreen in Electra Glide in Blue operates (for his
time and place) as a very atypical police officer, a personification of good policecommunity
relations, dedicated, principled, fair, respectful towards all those he
meets in his work, and reluctant to tolerate corruption or brutality on the part of
his fellow officers. His moral certitude and professional propriety makes him the
subject of widespread hostility within the police force. He books a speeding, off106
Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 106
 duty cop from LA despite the man’s badge and angry protests; he books the driver
of an overloaded truck despite the driver’s recent return from service in
Vietnam and his pleas for understanding; he discourages his partner, Zipper, from
harassing hippies for sport and refuses to turn a blind eye to Zipper’s secret recovery
of cash from the scene of Frank’s murder; he treats the delirious Willy with
respect and sensitivity rather than the contempt that others show; and he attempts
“proper police procedure” when dealing with an uncooperative hippie commune,
where Harve resorts to verbal abuse and physical violence to extract information.
Wintergreen therefore appears as a mediator between a right-wing Silent
Majority and a disintegrating counterculture in the ideologically determinate
space of the West in a way that accurately reflects what D. W. Meinig has
explained as the dominance in Arizona during the 1960s of a particularly conservative
ideology and brand of politics given national prominence by the 1964
Republican presidential campaign of Barry Goldwater.37 Wintergreen’s colleagues,
Harve, Zipper, and the Captain (and, by implication, the police in general) occupy
the space of the Right—corrupt, violent, bigoted, intolerant, and arrogant. The
hippies at the commune, Dave in the VW van, Bob Zemko and his biker companions,
and the young audience at the weekend rock concert occupy the space of the
Left, a disaffected population whose behavior it is Wintergreen’s job to monitor
and control. Electra Glide in Blue reconfigures what Thomas Schatz has identified
as the fundamental conflict between “Order” and “Anarchy” at the heart of the
classical Hollywood western’s moral structure, where Order eventually triumphs
over or at least contains Anarchy through the agency of the heroic protagonist.38
Wintergreen as heroic protagonist mediates not between Order and Anarchy but
between one Anarchy, in the guise of the forces of law and order working on behalf
of a resurgent and reactionary Silent Majority, and another form of Anarchy,
in the form of a counterculture in crisis now itself implicated in the cynicism and
paranoia of the later Vietnam era. By the end of the film he is profoundly alienated
from the established Order and shows certain sympathies with the countercul-
ture, the modern counterpart of the classical western’s Anarchy, lashing out at
Harve’s bigoted brutalization of what Wintergreen comes to see as mostly harmless
hippie kids.
Through this characterization, Electra Glide in Blue also mediates as a film
between what Robert B. Ray identified in his book A Certain Tendency of the
Hollywood Cinema as the divergent tendencies of “Left” and “Right” filmmaking
in the era, between the “outlaw heroes” of films on the Left such as Bonnie and
Clyde (Arthur Penn, 1967), The Wild Bunch (1969), and The Parallax View (Alan
J. Pakula, 1974) and the “official heroes” of films on the Right such as The Green
Berets (Ryan Kellogg and John Wayne, 1968), Coogan’s Bluff (1968), and Death
Wish (1973).39 Electra Glide in Blue inverts the structure of Dirty Harry, in which
a right-wing policeman finds himself at odds with a liberal Establishment, by portraying
Wintergreen as a liberal cop in a right-wing Establishment, emblemati-
cally locating the police officer at the center of the ideological vortex of Sixties
Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007 107
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 107
 America in a very different but arguably more accurate manner than Siegel’s film.
In this respect, Wintergreen’s narrative corroborates Marsha Kinder’s observation,
in reviewing the film in 1973, of a contemporary vogue in police films for “the
double-bind situation” in which the efforts of an honest cop to combat crime are
complicated by his membership in a corrupt institution, a situation powerfully
dramatized in Sidney Lumet’s Serpico (1973).40
“The double-bind situation.” In Electra Glide in Blue, Wintergreen finds
himself caught between Left and Right in an environment in which American
liberalism—the bogey man of Dirty Harry and the inspiration of Serpico—
struggles to survive. He gradually defects from the Right and shows increasing
sympathy for the Left, his evolution providing an allegory of contemporary reallife
events such as the leaking of the top-secret “Pentagon Papers” by the disaffect-
ed government strategist Daniel Ellsberg in 1971, the testimony against the Nixon
administration of former White House counsel John Dean at the 1973 Watergate
hearings, and the antiwar movement’s growing interest in the experiences and
opinions of returning Vietnam veterans.41 The film’s writer-producer Rupert
Hitzig was himself a young Vietnam veteran in the early 1970s, having served two
tours of duty in the Marines. In the early 1970s, Hitzig found himself “radicalizing
to the left” in opposition to Nixon, the Silent Majority, and the war.42 Hitzig
developed the story with a conscious focus on the pervasiveness of “labels” such as
“hippie,” “longhair,” “cowboy,” “hardhat,” and “pig” in what had become a polarized
society.43 This is the sense in which Electra Glide in Blue was conceived as
“the flip-side of Easy Rider”: as an exhortation to reconciliation through the dissolution
of the stereotypes of Right and Left.
Indeed, the film’s narrativization of a deeply polarized ideological terrain, and
of attempts to mediate within it, also finds deep resonances with the 1972 presidential
campaign of Democratic Senator George McGovern, which was taking
place while the film was in production but whose defeat by incumbent President
Richard Nixon seemed to put the final nail in the coffin of 1960s liberalism. The
McGovern campaign was engineered by party activists interested in modernizing
and broadening the range of constituencies represented by appealing for support
beyond the party’s traditional power blocs of Southern Democrats, labor unions,
and blue-collar workers. By 1972, McGovern had enlisted the allegiance of what
Theodore White characterized in The Making of the President 1972 as an idealistic
“guerilla army on the move,” including students, African Americans, feminists,
environmentalists, and other radicalized groups whose energy McGovern attempted
to redirect from protest in the streets to the convention hall and voting booth.44
This effort pushed the Democratic ticket further to the left, prompting McGovern
to declare, “My one unique position, with reference to the competition, is to be to
the left of them of all.”45 Long a vocal opponent of U.S. policy in Southeast Asia,
he proposed a total cutoff of funds to Vietnam operations, an amnesty for draft
dodgers and antiwar protesters, and taxes on the wealthy to reduce inner-city
108 Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 108
 poverty. He came out in favor of a woman’s right to choose, gun control, affirmative
action, and busing to combat the segregation of schools.46
His platform, his attempt to reach out to radicals from the mainstream, found
favor in the entertainment industry. The association of high-profile figures on the
left-liberal wing of Hollywood cinema, such as Warren Beatty, Robert Redford,
Jane Fonda, Donald Sutherland, and Peter Boyle, added to what appeared to be
the McGovern campaign’s credibility with young people. James William Guercio,
who directed Electra Glide in Blue, was an important record producer to groups
such as Blood, Sweat, and Tears, and Chicago, and he and the members of
Chicago participated in fund-raising events for McGovern and in voter registration
drives among young people at their concerts.47 The members of Chicago, all
of whom played minor roles in the film, including lead singer Peter Cetera in the
role of Bob Zemko, were presented as politically conscious musicians whose
songs responded to specific events (such as the invasion of Cambodia in 1970
in the song “Better End Soon”). The band and Guercio also met with prominent
liberal and progressive politicians and activists such as Senator J. William Fulbright
and Ralph Nader.
As we all know now, this entertainment industry support was not enough to
propel McGovern into the presidency. His platform collapsed in the last days of
the campaign largely due to a backlash from traditional Democrats and the refusal
of the AFL-CIO labor union to endorse him. Echoes of this collapse are evident
in the final moments of Electra Glide in Blue where, like McGovern’s campaign,
Wintergreen’s narrative ends in defeat. In the final scene, after the anticlimax of
solving Frank’s murder, he seems destined to sit out the rest of his life on the seat
of his motorcycle, his idealistic belief in the police force in tatters, his hopes for
promotion dashed, his best friend Zipper dead, Willy institutionalized, and deserted
by Jolene. But in the last seconds of the film, the counterculture too, with
which Wintergreen appears to sympathize, misunderstands and refuses to communicate
with him. Once again encountering the psychedelic VW van on the high-
way in Monument Valley, Wintergreen stops the vehicle for a routine check but
forgets to return the hippie driver’s license and sets off in a neighborly way to catch
up with the van and return it. Raising his hand in a friendly wave to get the driver’s
attention, his gesture is met by a sudden shotgun blast from the back of the
van, which blows him off his motorcycle (figure 5). This extinguishes the last hope
for mediation in a deeply fractured society. Up to this point the film has addressed
liberal and leftist fears of the moral corruption of the police, but now it issues a
stark warning against complacency and against the demonization of the police,
suggesting that the brutality of the forces of law and order has created its perverse
alter ego in the guise of an armed and dangerous counterculture.
By placing a gun in the hands of a hippie, Electra Glide in Blue registers what
political historian Allen J. Matusow has called the “loss of moral authority” by the
American Left in the early 1970s as “the rhetoric of love” was replaced by a reckless
“politics of rage.”48 Wintergreen’s death highlights the historical failure of
Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007 109
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 109
 communication, evident in the McGovern campaign, between the radical constituencies
of the counterculture and New Left, on the one hand, and the white
working class, on the other. Undercutting simple distinctions between hippies and
the police in terms of nonviolence and violence, it also recalls the perversion of
hippie ideals by the exploits of the Manson family a few years earlier and the
breakup of the counterculture into a plethora of bedraggled and isolated groups
such as the Symbionese Liberation Army leaning more than ever in the direction
of armed revolution and eventually losing any sensible identity or achievable program
of aims. Wintergreen dies as a result of a pincer movement by extremes of
Right and Left, which echoes the demise of official attempts at mediation, the
debilitation of liberal politics, and the failure of police-community relations, reinforcing
the film’s suggestion of America in a “no-win” scenario. As Michael
Goodwin put it in Take One in June 1972, the American cinema of the day seemed
to show a nation “Tooling up for Armageddon.”49
The only evident compensation for this rather despairing narrative ending, I
would argue, comes through a recourse to Nature and the representation of rural
space in the closing sequence of the film. This sequence provides a tentative
metaphor of the hope for reconciliation through a long and slow reverse tracking
shot of Wintergreen’s dead body receding into Monument Valley, together with
the emotive song “Tell Me,” written and composed by the film’s director James
William Guercio and, in part, an adaptation of “God Bless America” (figure 6).
The shot locates the protagonist—in death as in life—within the small, mobile,
mortal, temporary scale of human affairs and against the vast, immobile,
immutable grandeur of the natural space of the West. In this it would seem to
invoke the highly influential principles of the nineteenth century transcendentalism
of Henry David Thoreau for whom wilderness provided a route to universal
salvation and for whose writings Guercio expressed admiration in an interview
with Newsweek in 1973.50 The sequence appears as a Thoreauvian plea for social
110 Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007
Figure 5. An armed and dangerous counterculture—a hippie takes aim at
John Wintergreen in the closing moments of Electra Glide in Blue (United
Artists, 1973).
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 110
 tolerance despite repressive policing and armed conflict, despite the corrupting
urbanization of rural space, and despite the ascendancy of Nixon’s Silent Majority.
In the final image of desert landscape, the film speaks to an ecology of awe with
regard to the sublime beauty and grandeur of the American West—a sentiment
evident in the writings of the region’s first explorers, and of nature writers such as
John Muir and Mary Austin.51 It also rescues from the rather bleak image of hippie
counterculture the wilderness tradition, which it rejuvenated in the 1960s and
which emerged as one of that era’s most important and lasting legacies. Guercio
preferred to characterize the film as “realistic” rather than “pessimistic,” insisting
that, despite its bleakness, the closing of the film suggested to contemporary
America that “there’s still time for us to change.”52
That said, if the final sequence implicitly valorizes ecology as one valuable
legacy of the counterculture in the 1970s, it seems to struggle to respond to the
darkness of the film’s prognosis on the future of American society, providing, at
best, a highly unstable sense of closure. Coming as it does after the film’s discrediting
of the countercultural enterprise of “back to the land,” it also points forward
to the ideological containment of environmentalism as an acceptable agenda for
the 1970s: as Mike Davis has shown, environmental concerns subsequently
became the preserve of conservative as much as radical interests in American society.53
In its final sequence, which is a tour de force of film style and music, Electra
Glide in Blue strains for a resolution of which it does not seem entirely convinced,
having unforgivingly portrayed the death of mediation in America in 1973 in spite
of the profound wish and need for its success.
Social Critique, Product Placement, and the New Hollywood. Electra
Glide in Blue opened in August 1973 and performed below box-office expectations,
grossing just $923,672 in the first ten weeks of its release. By way of com-
parison, Cleopatra Jones (Jack Starrett, 1973), Jesus Christ Superstar (Norman
Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007 111
Figure 6. John Wintergreen’s dead body recedes into Monument Valley in
the closing shot of Electra Glide in Blue (United Artists, 1973).
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 111
 Jewison, 1973), Enter the Dragon (Robert Clouse, 1973), and The Way We Were
(Sydney Pollack, 1973) earned $2.54 million, $3.05 million, $3.71 million, and $10
million, respectively, in the same period.54 Electra Glide in Blue generated an
ambivalent response among critics. Although its director and writer-producers
were in their late twenties, and the film was pitched at a youth audience with
its road movie template, dystopian analysis of the nation’s social ills, and rock
music soundtrack, Kevin Thomas in the Los Angeles Times and John Simon in the
New York Times saw its message as dated and looked forward to the emergence of
a new Hollywood cinema beyond the divisions and trauma of the 1960s.55 Jay
Cocks in Time was suspicious that the film seemed excessively “calculated for
effect,” and Joseph Gelmis in the Washington Post dismissed its expensive marketing
campaign by United Artists as a “plastic package.”56 Its production budget of
$1.1 million, while modest, was significantly larger than the $350,000 budget of
Easy Rider, and its cinematography, editing, and sound did not display quite so
many of the rough edges that the latter had carried as a mark of its debt to
exploitation cinema.57 In Variety, the reviewer Frank Segers made a point of noting
that Guercio had contributed $200,000 of his personal funds in order to pay
for the Panavision process.58
David Picker, chief executive of United Artists, and one of the industry’s
young and broad-minded managers, immediately gave Electra Glide in Blue the
green light when it was presented to him in 1971 though Guercio had never
worked in film before, let alone directed.59 United Artists, which had recently
been bought by Transamerica Corporation, had set a record level of investment in
films of $259 million in 1969 only to report a $35 million operating loss as an
industry-wide recession gripped Hollywood.60 Its fifteen releases of 1973, including
Live and Let Die (Guy Hamilton), Serpico, Sleeper (Woody Allen), and The
Spook Who Sat By the Door (Ivan Dixon), achieved mixed success as the studio
struggled through a period of corporate reorganization largely dependent on
diversifying its interests into television and recorded music. Much of the press
generated by Electra Glide in Blue focused on Guercio’s achievements as a businessman,
a rock music producer at the helm of what The Los Angeles Herald-
Examiner described as a “media empire” based around the Caribou Ranch in
Colorado, “one of the most modern recording facilities in the world,” a sort of capital-intensive
adaptation of the hippie commune frequented by Stephen Stills and
other rock superstars of the day.61 For Charles Champlin in the Chicago SunTimes,
the film represented “the first attempt to deploy the organizing skills and
audience-awareness of the potent record industry to the movies…”62
With a soundtrack composed and produced by Guercio himself, members of
the band Chicago acting in the film, and the inclusion of an extended piece of live
concert footage of another band, Madura, which Guercio also managed, Electra
Glide in Blue demonstrated an early form of product placement, integrating music
and film with a greater seamlessness than Easy Rider, Zabriskie Point, or other
films of the day with prominent rock music soundtracks. In fact, Guercio stated
112 Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 112
 that he expected the record sales of the film’s soundtrack alone to recuperate the
costs of the film.63 In this respect, the uncertainty implicit in the film’s content was
ultimately at odds with the emerging certainties of a new Hollywood economics
based upon corporate synergies and power through which the countercultural
genie that had forcefully emerged in American cinema in the Sixties was gradually
put back in its box.
Notes
1. David James, Allegories of Cinema: American Film in the Sixties (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1989).
2. On the countercultural conception of Nature, see Charles Reich’s best-selling countercultural
manifesto of 1970, The Greening of America (New York: Random House,
1970); Roderick Nash, Wilderness and the American Mind (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1973 [1967]), 96–140; and Max Oelschlaeger, The Idea of Wilderness (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1991), 172–202. On the counterculture and pastoral, see
Leo Marx, “Pastoralism in America,” in Ideology and Classic American Literature, ed.
Sacvan Bercovitch and Myra Jehlen (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986);
and Leo Marx, The Machine in the Garden: Technology and the Pastoral Ideal in
America (New York: Oxford University Press, 1967), 34–72.
3. Penelope Gilliatt, “The Current Cinema: Into the Eye of the Storm,” The New Yorker,
July 19, 1969, 70.
4. Fredric Jameson, “Periodizing the Sixties,” in The Sixties Without Apology, ed. Sohnya
Sayres, Anders Stephenson, Stanley Aronowitz, and Fredric Jameson (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1988), 183.
5. Rupert Hitzig, interview with the author, Los Angeles, December 2, 1996.
6. Robert B. Ray, A Certain Tendency of the Hollywood Cinema, 1930–1980 (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985), 306.
7. See Robert M. Collins, “Growth Liberalism in the Sixties,” in The Sixties: From
Memory to History, ed. David Farber (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1994), 11–44.
8. The film was shot on location in Scottsdale, Arizona. The cities of Phoenix and
Scottsdale refused the production permission to use real place-names in the film—
hence the fictional town of Stockburn was created.
9. Thomas Schatz, Old Hollywood/New Hollywood: Ritual, Art and Industry, Studies in
Cinema, no.15 (Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1983), 69–70.
10. For contemporary discussions of the urbanization of the western, see Pauline Kael,
“Saint Cop,” in The New Yorker, January 15, 1972, 78–82; and Isidore Silver, “Police
as Folk Heroes,” Society 9 (May 1972): 45–46.
11. D. W. Meinig, The Southwest: Three Peoples in Geographical Change, 1600–1970
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1971), 77–81.
12. Hitzig, interview with the author.
13. Lynn I. Perrigo, The American Southwest: Its Peoples and Cultures (New York: Holt,
Rinehart, and Winston, 1971), 348–49. See also Meinig, The Southwest, 85.
14. Perrigo, The American Southwest, 348–49.
15. Robert Lang, Metropolitan Institute at Virginia Institute of Technology, “Understanding
Metropolitan Change: The Urban Turnaround, Boomburbs, and Growth Counties”
(paper delivered at the Census 2000 Conference, University of California Berkeley,
November 1, 2002).
16. David Lavender, The Southwest (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1980),
287–88.
Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007 113
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 113
 17. Wallace C. Peterson, Income, Employment, and Economic Growth, 4th ed. (New York:
W. W. Norton & Co., 1978), 448–52; and Walter W. Heller, The Economy: Old Myths
and New Realities (New York: W. W. Norton, 1975), 14–15. See also Joel Popkin, ed.,
Analysis of Inflation, 1965–74 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research
and Ballinger Publishing Corp., 1977), 67–112; and U.S. Congressional Budget Office,
“Historical Budget Data,” January 26, 2006, p. 12.
18. See Collins, “Growth Liberalism in the Sixties”; David M. Barrett, Uncertain Warriors:
Lyndon Johnson and his Vietnam Advisors (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas,
1993); Richard A. Melanson, Reconstructing Consensus: American Foreign Policy
Since the Vietnam War (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1991); Michael Charlton and
Anthony Moncrieff, Many Reasons Why: The American Involvement in Vietnam, 2nd
ed. (New York: Hill & Wang, 1989).
19. Marshall Berman, All That Is Solid Melts Into Air: The Experience of Modernity (New
York: Verso, 1983), 330.
20. Useful contemporary accounts of the Nixon presidency include Theodore H. White,
Breach of Faith: The Fall of Richard Nixon (New York: Dell Publishing, 1975); Alden
Whitman, “Who and What is Richard Nixon?” and Robert B. Semple Jr., “The Political
Man Miscalculates,” in New York Times staff, The End of a Presidency (New York:
Bantam Books, 1974), 9-21 and 22–27, respectively.
21. Geoffrey Barraclough, “The End of an Era,” New York Review, June 27, 1974, 14–20;
and James O’Connor, The Fiscal Crisis of the State (New York: St Martin’s Press, 1973).
See also Peter N. Carroll and David W. Noble, The Free and the Unfree: A New
History of the United States, 2nd ed. (Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books,
1988), 383–400.
22. See Jon Wiener, “Inside the Nixon Liebrary” and “Tocqueville, Marx, Weber, Nixon:
Watergate in Theory,” in Professors, Politics and Pop (London: Verso, 1991), 270–77
and 308–24, respectively. See also San Francisco Bay Area Kapitalistate Group,
“Watergate, or the Eighteenth Brumaire of Richard Nixon,” Kapitalistate, no.3 (Spring
1975): 3–14; and David Farber, “The Silent Majority and Talk of Revolution,” in The
Sixties, ed. Farber, 291–316.
23. John N. Mitchell, quoted in Wiener, Professors, Politics and Pop, 321.
24. U.S. Department of Justice, Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, “Trends in
Expenditure and Employment Data for the Criminal Justice System, 1971–74”
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1976), 2–3; cited in Center for
Research on Criminal Justice, The Iron Fist and the Velvet Glove: An Analysis of the
US Police, 2nd ed. (Berkeley, CA: Center for Research on Criminal Justice, 1977), 5.
25. Center for Research on Criminal Justice, The Iron Fist and the Velvet Glove, 5. For
statistical evidence of the growth of federal expenditure on law and order under Nixon,
see Center for National Security Studies, Law and Disorder IV (Washington, D.C.:
Center for National Security Studies, 1976), 3; and J. D. Brewer, A. Guelke, I. Hume,
E. Moxon-Browne, and R. Wilford, The Police, Public Order and the State (London:
Macmillan, 1988), 111.
26. Center for Research on Criminal Justice, The Iron Fist and the Velvet Glove, 9.
27. John D. Brewer et al., eds., The Police, Public Order and the State, 111; U.S. Department
of Justice, Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, “Sourcebook of Criminal
Justice Statistics” (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1973), 198.
On the proliferation of private and official gun culture in the 1960s, see Lee Kennett
and James LaVerne Anderson, The Gun in America: The Origins of a National
Dilemma (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1976), 216–45; and Robert J. Spitzer, The
Politics of Gun Control (Newark, NJ: Chatham House Publishing, 1995), 67.
28. U.S. Department of Justice, Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, “Sourcebook
of Criminal Justice Statistics,” 171.
114 Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 114
 29. Robert Blake, who starred as John Wintergreen in Electra Glide in Blue, would subsequently
win an Emmy and a Golden Globe award for his performances in the lead role
in the popular TV show Baretta (1975–1978), based around the exploits of a maverick
undercover New York City detective.
30. Kael, “Saint Cop,” 78–82; David Denby, “Law and Disorder: The Cinema Cop as Sap
and Sadist,” Harper’s 248, March 1974, 82–4. For contextualization of these representations
in the larger history of cinematic representations of the police, see Robert
Reiner, “From Keystone to Kojak: The Hollywood Cop,” in Philip Davies and Brian Neve,
Cinema, Politics and Society in America (Manchester and New York: Manchester
University Press, 1981), 195–220.
31. See Center for Research on Criminal Justice, The Iron Fist and the Velvet Glove, 123;
Richard Polenberg, One Nation Divisible: Class, Race, and Ethnicity in the United
States Since 1938 (Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books, 1988 [1980]), 218–20;
Nelson Blackstock, COINTELPRO: The FBI’s Secret War on Political Freedom (New
York: Anchor Foundation/Pathfinder, 1990 [1975]).
32. Hugh Davis Graham and Ted Robert Gurr, Violence in America: Historical and
Comparative Perspectives (Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publications, 1979), 47–61.
33. “The Army is the only damn thing holding this country together,” cover feature on the
United States military, Atlantic Monthly, October 1970.
34. Graham and Gurr, Violence in America, 57.
35. President Johnson’s Commission on the Causes and Prevention of Violence was only the
highest profile in a long line of official and academic studies of the issue, including
those by the National Center on Police and Community Relations (at Michigan State
University, 1966), the President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration
of Justice (1966), the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders (the Kerner
Report, 1968), and the National Advisory Commission on Criminal Justice Standards
and Goals (1973). See National Commission on the Causes and Prevention of Violence,
Rights in Conflict: The Violent Confrontation of Demonstrators and Police in the Parks
and Streets of Chicago during the week of the Democratic National Convention, by
Daniel Walker et al. (New York: Bantam Books, 1968). See also P. C. Kratcoski and D.
B. Walker, Criminal Justice in America (Glenview: Scott Foreman & Co., 1978), 116–119;
T. A. Johnson, G. E. Misner, and L. P. Brown, The Police and Society: An Environment
for Collaboration and Confrontation (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall Inc., 1981), 17.
36. Albert J. Reiss Jr., The Police and the Public (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1971),
138.
37. Meinig, The Southwest, 93. On the distinctive propensity of the southwest for Radical
Right politics in the 1960s, see also Sheila R. Koeppen, “Anger on the Right,” Annals
of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, no. 382 (March 1969): 73–82.
38. Schatz, Old Hollywood/New Hollywood, 103–4.
39. Ray, A Certain Tendency of the Hollywood Cinema, 298.
40. Marsha Kinder, “The Return of the Outlaw Couple,” Film Quarterly 27, no. 4
(Summer 1974): 2–10.
41. For accounts of Daniel Ellsberg and Vietnam veterans against the war, see Tom
Engelhardt, The End of Victory Culture: Cold War America and the Disillusioning of
a Generation (New York: Basic Books, 1995), 227–54.
42. Hitzig, interview with the author.
43. Ibid.
44. Theodore White, The Making of a President 1972 (London: Jonathan Cape, 1973), 96–97.
45. McGovern quoted in White, The Making of a President, 43.
46. See Robert Sam Anson, McGovern: A Biography (New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1972), 239–40; White, The Making of a President, 115–19; Spitzer, The
Politics of Gun Control, 124; and Michael X Della Carpini, “The Making of a
Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007 115
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 115
 Consensual Majority”, in An American Half-Century: Postwar Culture and Politics in
the USA, ed. Michael Klein (London: Pluto Press, 1994), 232–73.
47. See Maureen Orth, “American Dreamer,” an interview with James William Guercio,
Newsweek, September 10, 1973, 52; and Edwin Miller, “The Sound of Chicago,”
Seventeen, December 1973, 111.
48. Allen J. Matusow, The Unraveling of America: A History of Liberalism in the 1960s
(New York: Harper & Row, 1984), 303, 343. On the increasing use of firearms by radical
left groups, see Lee Kennett and James LaVerne Anderson, The Gun in America:
The Origins of a National Dilemma (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1976), 237.
49. Michael Goodwin, “Tooling Up For Armageddon,” Take One 3, no. 4 (June 1972): 6–7.
Similar arguments are evident in William J. Crotty, “Violence in America,” Society 9
(May 1972): 20–29; Dan Wakefield, “The War at Home,” Atlantic Monthly 224, no. 4,
October 1969, 119–24; and Donald P. Costello, “From Counter-Culture to AntiCulture,”
Commonweal, vol. 46, no. 16, July 14, 1972, 383–86.
50. See Orth, “American Dreamer,” 52.
51. See Thomas J. Lyon, “The Nature Essay in the West,” in A Literary History of the
American West, ed. J. Golden Taylor et al., (produced by The Western Literature
Association, Fort Worth: Texas Christian University Press, 1987), 228–236; and Nash,
Wilderness and the American Mind, 84–95.
52. Quoted in Charles Champlin, “Rock Producer’s Film Hits the Charts at Cannes,”
Chicago Sun-Times, Monday, May 21, 1973, 28.
53. Mike Davis, City of Quartz: Excavating the Future in Los Angeles (London: Vintage,
1992), 171–74.
54. “50 Top-Grossing Films,” Variety, December 12, 1973, 9, and “Big Rental Films of
1973,” Variety, January 9, 1974, 19.
55. Kevin Thomas, Los Angeles Times, August 29, 1973, Part 2, 1; John Simon, New York
Times, August 26, 1973, 1, 11.
56. Jay Cocks, Time, September 10, 1973, 70; Joseph Gelmis, Washington Post, August 20,
1973, 47. See also Charles Champlin, Los Angeles Times, August 5, 1973, 1, 64; Charles
Champlin, Washington Post, August 26, 1973, 60; Peter Ainslie, Interview, October
1973, 34–5; Roger Greenspun, New York Times, August 20, 1973, 21.
57. Frank Segers, “Guercio, Tunester Turned Filmmaker, Hits Economics,” Variety,
August 29, 1973, 1. Segers explains that “James William Guercio espouses a financial
code that makes new line studio bosses sound like profligate spenders.”
58. Segers, 1. $970,000 was provided by United Artists.
59. See Orth, “American Dreamer,” 52.
60. Tino Balio, United Artists: The Company that Changed the Film Industry (Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, 1987), 69–74. Indeed, David Picker did not survive long
as president of United Artists, leaving to work in independent production in October
1973, just a few months after the release of Electra Glide in Blue.
61. Ray Loynd, “A Media Empire in the Rockies,” Los Angeles Herald-Examiner, August
5, 1973, 1, 6. In addition to music producing and the Caribou Ranch recording facilities,
Guercio developed his business into Country Music Television, a corporation that
was eventually sold to Opryland USA Inc., a division of Gaylord Broadcasting and
Westinghouse Broadcasting Company in 1991. The Caribou Ranch was described as a
haven for Guercio, his family, friends, and other rock superstars of the day. See also
Peter Ainslie, “James Guercio: The Electra Director,” Interview, October 1973, 34–35.
62. Charles Champlin, “Rock Producer’s Film Hits the Charts at Cannes,” Chicago SunTimes,
Monday, May 21, 1973, 28.
63. Miller, “The Sound of Chicago,” 123. See also Gene Moskowitz, review of Electra
Glide in Blue, Variety, May 23, 1973, 18.
116 Cinema Journal 46, No. 2, Winter 2007
Shiel.qxp  2/16/07  10:42 AM  Page 116
