65
Book
Reviews
Feminist Interventions in Early American Studies. Edited by Mary C. Carruth. 
 Reviewed by Jennifer Desiderio. 69
Boys at Home: Discipline, Masculinity, and “The Boy-Problem” in
 Nineteenth-Century American Literature. By Ken Parille. Reviewed by
 Lorinda B. Cohoon. 70
John Brown’s War Against Slavery. By Robert E. McGlone. Reviewed by
 Kristen K. Epps. 71
Beleaguered Poets and Leftist Critics: Stevens, Cummings, Frost, and
 Williams in the 1930s. By Milton A. Cohen. Reviewed by Marilyn Walker. 72
Faith in the Fight: Religion and the American Soldier in the Great War.
 By Jonathan H. Ebel. Reviewed by Bradley Carter. 73
From Douglass to Duvalier: U.S. African Americans, Haiti, and Pan
 Americanism, 1870–1864. By Millery Polyné. Reviewed by Julio Capó, Jr. 75
Airborne Dreams: “Nisei” Stewardesses and Pan American World Airways. By 
Christine R. Yano. Reviewed by Lindsey Feitz. 76
A Black Soldier’s Story: The Narrative of Ricardo Batrell and the Cuban War of 
Independence. By Ricardo Batrell. Edited & Translated by Mark A. Sanders. 
Reviewed by Michael A. Antonucci. 77
Cruel Optimism. By Lauren Berlant. Reviewed by Will Cooley 79
Embattled Ecumenism: The National Council of Churches, The Vietnam War,
 and the Trials of the Protestant Left. By Jill K. Gill. Reviewed by
 Curtis J. Evans. 80
The Ethics of Sightseeing. By Dean MacCannell. Reviewed by David M. Wrobel. 80
Gary: The Most American of All American Cities. By S. Paul O’Hara.
 Reviewed by Jennifer F. Hamer. 83
Gender, Race, and Mourning in American Modernism. By Greg Forter.
 Reviewed by Beth Widmaier Capo. 84
God’s Arbiters: Americans and the Philippines, 1898–1902. By Susan K. Harris. 
Reviewed by Donald Pease. 85
Guantánamo: An American History. By Jonathan M. Hansen. Reviewed by
 Daniel R. Miller. 90
 66
How to Be South Asian in America: Narratives of Ambivalence and Belonging.
 By Anupama Jain. Reviewed by Priya J. Shah. 91
Imprisoned in a Luminous Glare: Photography and the African American
 Freedom Struggle. By Leigh Raiford. Reviewed by Maurice L. Byran Jr. 92
Medgar Evers: Mississippi Martyr. By Michael Vinson Williams. Reviewed by
 Paula L. Webb. 93
Opportunity Denied: Limiting Black Women to Devalued Work. By Enobong
 Hanna Branch. Reviewed by Jennifer F. Hamer. 94
The Passion of Tiger Woods: An Anthropologist Reports on Golf, Race, and
 Celebrity Scandal. By Orin Starn. Reviewed by Thabiti Lewis. 96
Reading Up: Middle Class Readers and the Culture of Success in the Early
 Twentieth Century United States. By Amy L. Blair. Reviewed by Kathleen 
Rooney. 97
Seeing through Race: A Reinterpretation of Civil Rights Photography. By
 Martin A. Berger. Reviewed by Lakesia D. Johnson. 98
Strictly Kosher Reading: Popular Literature and the Condition of Contemporary 
Orthodoxy. By Yoel Finkelman. Reviewed by Tamar H. Havilio. 99
Those Girls: Single Women in Sixties and Seventies Popular Culture.
	 By	Katherine	J.	Lehman.	Reviewed	by	Rasa	Baločkaitė.	 100
The White Negress: Literature, Minstrelsy, and the Black-Jewish Imaginary.
 By Lori Harrison-Kahan. Reviewed by Megan E. Williams. 102
Aloha America: Hula Circuits through the U.S. Empire. By Adria L. Imada.
 Reviewed by L. Ayu Saraswati. 103
America’s Film Legacy, 2009–2010: A Viewer’s Guide to the 50 Landmark Movies 
Added to the National Film Registry in 2009–2010. By Daniel Egan.
 Reviewed by Bernard F. Dick. 104
Fatalism in American Film Noir: Some Cinematic Philosophy. By Robert B.
 Pippin. Reviewed by Bernard F. Dick. 104
American Shoman: Samuel “Roxy” Rothafel and the Birth of the Entertainment 
Industry. By Ross Melnick. Reviewed by Bernard F. Dick. 104
The Anthropological Study of Class and Consciousness. By E. Paul Durrenberger. 
Reviewed	by	Steve	Striffler.	 107
An Army of Lions: The Civil Rights Struggle Before the NAACP. By Shawn
 Leigh Alexander. Reviewed by Eric Michael Washington. 108
Arrested Justice: Black Women, Violence, and America’s Prison Nation.
 By Beth E. Richie. Reviewed by Rhonda Y. Williams. 109
The Beautiful Musical All Around Us: Field Recordings and the American
 Experience. By Stephen Wade. Reviewed by Z. Hall. 110
Black Star, Crescent Moon: The Muslim International and Black Freedom
 beyond America. By Sohail Daulatzai. Reviewed by Christopher M. Tinson. 111
Celluloid Sermons: The Emergence of the Christian Film Industry, 1930–1986. By 
Terry Lindvall and Andrew Quicke. Reviewed by Z. Hall. 112
Corn Palaces and Butter Queens: A History of Crop Art and Dairy Sculpture. By 
Pamela H. Simpson. Reviewed by Erica Hannickel. 113
Colors of Confinement: Rare Codachrome Photographs of Japanese American 
Incarceration in World War II. Edited by Eric Mueller. Reviewed by
 Lawrence Y. Matsuda. 114
Cruel and Unusual: The American Death Penalty and the Founders’ Eighth
 Amendment. By John D. Bessler. Reviewed by Elizabeth Cateforis. 115
 67
Editorial note: Book reviews are edited for typographical errors, and 
otherwise are printed as received.
Democratic Narrative, History, and Memory. Edited by Carole A. Barbato and
 Laura L. Davis. Reviewed by Tim Lacy. 117
Henry Ford’s War on Jews and the Legal Battle Against Hate Speech. By Victoria 
Saker Woeste. Reviewed by Jessica Cooperman. 119
In the Crossfire: Marcus Foster and the Troubled History of American
 School Reform. By John P. Spencer. Reviewed by Dionne Danns. 120
Putting the Barn Before the House: Women and Family Farming in Early
 Twentieth-Century New York. By Grey Osterud. Reviewed by Sara E. Morris. 121
Queer Environmentality. By Robert Azzarello. Reviewed by Bob Johnson. 122
Social Death: Racialized Rightlessness and the Criminalization of the
 Unprotected. By Lisa Marie Cacho. Reviewed by Guy Lancaster. 124
Subversives: The FBI’s War on Student Radicals, and Reagan’s Rise to Power.
 By Seth Rosenfeld. Reviewed by Bernard F. Dick. 125
The Voice Is All: Lonely Victory of Jack Kerouac. By Joyce Johnson.
 Reviewed by John Lennon. 126
 68
 69
Reviews
FEMINIST INTERVENTIONS IN EARLY AMERICAN STUDIES. Edited by Mary 
C. Carruth. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press. 2006.
 In 2006, in her introduction to Feminist Interventions in Early American Studies, 
Mary C. Carruth observed that “no critical collection showcasing feminist perspectives
has yet emerged” on early American literature (xiii). She answered this “gap in 
scholarship” with a collection of seventeen essays that “span two centuries, starting 
with the seventeenth-century English and Spanish colonies and continuing throughout 
the eighteenth century” (xiii, xvii). These essays focus on well-known authors, from 
Phillis Wheatley and Catharine Sedgwick to anonymous Southern Quaker women. 
The essayists cover the non-canonical genres that women traditionally penned, like 
captivity tales, travel records, letters, and diaries, and more canonical genres like 
poetry, novels, and drama. In fact, Mary Rose Kasraie mixes the canonical with the 
non-canonical in her compelling essay on Judith Sargent Murray and her letters, instead
of her famous Gleaner essays. Carruth’s introduction underscores the importance 
of feminist studies not to be “subsume[d]” by early American studies; rather, she and 
her	contributors	work	tirelessly	for	these	two	fields	to	be	equally	“link[ed]”	(xiii).	Carruth
cites Sharon M. Harris’s essay “Feminist Theories and Early American Studies,” 
which is reprinted in the collection, as a commendable example of the collection’s 
theoretical frame. Harris uses feminist theory to open up the under-studied genre 
of the infanticide narrative to transform readers’ understanding of early American 
culture, such as what it means to have a “legally gendered crime” (xiii). 
 While secondary texts featuring feminism and early American studies and 
primary texts by seventeenth- and eighteenth-century women have been published 
since this collection, Feminist Interventions in Early American Studies holds an 
invaluable place in scholarship as Carruth offers seventeen insightful essays as well 
 70
as an introduction containing a thorough history of the academy’s polemical reaction
to feminist studies’ effect on American literature. In her introduction, she cites 
the work of eminent scholars such as Sharon M. Harris, Annette Kolodny, Cathy N. 
Davidson, and Frances Foster Smith and their challenges to traditional understandings
of	American	literature	and	culture.	Carruth	defines	feminist	theory	“as	not	solely	
an analysis of gender but of the intersections of gender, race, class, nationality, and 
other markers of difference that characterize individuals and their relationships to 
institutionalized power” (xvi). In particular, Carruth highlights the importance of 
feminist theory and the discipline’s current push towards transnational studies. She 
states, “a transatlantic feminist lens would bring to light and historicize the different 
constructions of masculinity and their interactions with race, class, and culture. . .it 
would also identify and compare the literary productions, many in nontraditional 
genres, of diverse women writing in and about the Atlantic world” (xvi). Carruth 
gives excellent examples of this approach with smart essays by Tamara Harvey, on 
the poetry of Anne Bradstreet and Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz, and Margo Echenberg, 
on Sor Juana’s self-portraiture. 
 In sum, this is a necessary and well-informed collection of essays for any student
or teacher of feminist theory and early American studies. Carruth puts it best 
when she writes that “this collection recovers women’s voices” and “reformulates 
customary ways of understanding early American life and letters” (xix). 
Canisius College Jennifer Desiderio
BOYS AT HOME: Discipline, Masculinity, and “The Boy-Problem” in NineteenthCentury
American Literature. By Ken Parille. Knoxville: University of Tennessee 
Press. 2009. 
 Boys at Home examines nineteenth-century texts written for and about boys 
and makes the persuasive argument that the places of boys in the home, at work, in 
school, and at play must be examined in the context of complex ideologies connected 
to parenting, education, and national histories. Parille challenges “separate spheres” 
readings of children’s books and addresses how boys and girls live, work, study, and 
play in spheres that intersect and are linked together. His book is organized into discussions
of “forms of pedagogy”: “play-adventure, corporal punishment, sympathy, 
shame, and reading” (xiii). The study explores such forms as child-rearing advice, 
boys’ conduct books, and boy books by women writers. 
 Chapter 1, “Work and Play, Pleasure and Pedagogy in Nineteenth-Century Boys’ 
Novels” explores how domestic ideology and childhood pedagogy shape how play 
is depicted in books for boys by Jacob Abbott and William Taylor Adams. He notes 
that representation of play connect to work and education, with work becoming play 
or adventure offering lessons. Chapter 2, “‘Desirable and Necessary’ in ‘Families 
and Schools’: Boy-Nature and Physical Discipline,” indicates that rather than focus 
only on physical discipline, nineteenth-century children’s texts and parental advice 
manuals considered a variety of methods of discipline. 
 71
 Chapter 3, “‘The Medicine of Sympathy’: Mothers, Sons, and Affective Pedagogy
in Antebellum America,” focuses on concepts of sympathy in texts by Harriet 
Beecher Stowe and Catharine Maria Sedgwick, arguing that writers who examine 
the	question	of	disciplining	boys	critique	the	nineteenth-century	ideology	of	the	allsympathetic
mother as able to change and tame boys. Chapter 4, “‘Wake Up, and Be 
a Man’: Little Women, Shame, and the Ethic of Submission,” offers a groundbreaking 
reading of how Little Women addresses issues of boyhood in domestic settings. 
	 The	 strong	fifth	 chapter,	 “‘What	Our	Boys	Are	Reading’:	Lydia	Sigourney,	
Francis Forrester, and Boyhood Literacy,” examines how conduct books and teaching
manuals	address	the	specific	concerns	of	boyhood	literacy.	Concluding	his	study,	
Parille discusses how current studies of boyhood continue to perpetuate some of the 
generalizations about boyhood that the texts he studies challenge. 
 This project makes important contributions to American studies, studies of 
American women writers, children’s literature, boyhood studies, and childhood 
studies. It insists on placing studies of boyhood and boys’ reading in the context of 
other studies of domesticity, pedagogy, and cultures of letters. It calls for additional 
investigation of intersections between boys’ and girls’ books and provides innovative 
readings of the treatment of boys in familiar and unfamiliar texts.
University of Memphis  Lorinda B. Cohoon
JOHN BROWN’S WAR AGAINST SLAVERY. By Robert E. McGlone. New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 2009.
	 For	any	scholar	of	the	sectional	conflict	of	the	1850s,	John	Brown	is	a	trying	and	
perplexing individual. Thanks to larger-than-life tales, family lore, and the ideologically
driven	critiques	of	his	political	enemies,	scholars	still	struggle	to	make	sense	
of this man who attempted a daring (but ultimately unsuccessful) attack on Harper’s 
Ferry, Virginia, in 1859. Was John Brown a hotheaded, murderous fanatic, and were 
his actions at Pottawatomie rooted in his family’s supposed history of mental illness? 
What were his intentions at Harper’s Ferry, and why did the raid fail so miserably? 
These	are	only	a	few	of	the	questions	that	McGlone	addresses	in	his	pathbreaking	
work, John Brown’s War Against Slavery. 
 This excellent treatment provides convincing evidence that Brown’s motivations
were varied and complex. For McGlone, Brown was an ordinary man with an 
extraordinary mission. Unlike biographers such as Stephen Oates, who focused on 
Brown’s Calvinist upbringing and strict adherence to Christian doctrine, McGlone 
emphasizes the secular concerns and everyday experiences that shaped Brown into 
the abolitionist warrior that he became. He argues that “his war against slavery was 
rooted in a lifetime of social experience and an embrace of republican ideals as much 
as in religious conviction” (7). Likewise, while other biographers emphasize what 
they perceive as moments of instability and reckless behavior, McGlone instead offers
evidence of a man who, “contrary to his image then and now, . . . did not often 
act impulsively or in uncontrolled rage. John Brown was a thoughtful, often even 
circumspect	doctrinaire”	(9).	Perhaps	the	most	interesting	and	significant	chapter	is	
 72
chapter 8, “God’s Reaper,” where McGlone examines the evidence of mental illness 
in the Brown genealogy. By his estimation, Brown suffered from no psychosis, nor 
from manic-depressive disorders or senility. Later chapters (particularly chapters 12 
and 13) provide additional discussion of Brown’s behavior after he realized the raid 
would ultimately fail. These sections are particularly convincing interpretations.
	 Thanks	to	intense	archival	research	and	interdisciplinary	techniques	(particularly	
those of psychology), McGlone effectively deconstructs this enigmatic individual 
who played such a key role in the coming of the Civil War. Unlike other biographies 
that adopt a narrative approach, he eschews a chronological retelling of key moments
in Brown’s life in favor of a thematic, argument-driven analysis that unpacks 
the key debates of the last 150 years. While he may go too far in discounting later 
oral histories, the author acknowledges the hazards of relying too heavily on faulty 
memories; as a result he focuses instead on sources contemporary to the events of 
Brown’s life, including personal correspondence. Although this thematic treatment 
may be off-putting to those uninitiated into the world of Brown scholarship, for 
academic audiences it provides a fresh perspective. 
 Today the images of Brown as a madman and murderer may live on, but this 
wonderfully accessible, thoroughly researched biography will do much to bring 
Brown’s true nature out of the shadows.
Colorado State University, Pueblo Kristen K. Epps
BELEAGUERED POETS AND LEFTIST CRITICS: Stevens, Cummings, Frost, 
and Williams in the 1930s. By Milton A. Cohen. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama 
Press. 2010.
 In Milton A. Cohen’s Beleaguered Poets and Leftist Critics: Stevens, Cummings, 
Frost, and Williams in the 1930s, he convincingly argues that literary critics marshaled 
political and intellectual activism to persuade middle-class poets to write on behalf of 
the American worker. Before the Great Depression, Wallace Stevens (1879–1955), E. 
E. Cummings (1894–1962), Robert Frost (1874–1963), and William Carlos Williams 
(1883–1963) were praised by literary audiences. They had autonomy to write about 
a myriad of topics ranging from nature to observations about daily life. However, 
with the advent of a national economic crisis, the previously mentioned poets were 
bestowed with new responsibilities such as contemplating the politics of the Great 
Depression and representing socially and economically disenfranchised people. According
to Cohen’s scholarship, critics such as Mike Gold, Malcolm Cowley, and 
Eda Lou Walton, encouraged Stevens, Cummings, Frost, and Williams to write about 
the working class and the challenges they encountered in modern society. 
 Interestingly, predating Cohen’s cadre of poets, working-class life infused poetry, 
fiction,	and	drama.	For	example,	in	the	Victorian	period	(1832–1901),	writers	such	
as Elizabeth Barrett Browning (1806–1901), Elizabeth Gaskell (1810–1865), and 
Charles Dickens (1812–1870) composed sympathetic portrayals of laborers during 
the Industrial Revolution (1750–1850). Likewise, during the Harlem Renaissance 
(1919–1940), writers such as Zora Neale Hurston (1891–1960), Claude McKay 
 73
(1889–1948), and Langston Hughes (1902–1967) also expressed working-class 
concerns through setting, dialect, and attire. Furthermore, the scholarship of William 
J. Maxwell and Arnold Rampersad has chronicled McKay and Hughes’s association
with the political left and communism. However, Cohen’s niche is mapping the 
artistic	advocacy	of	literary	critics	and	poets	and	illuminating	the	influence	of	leftist	
critics upon American modernist poetry. 
	 Consequently,	 accompanied	by	histories	 on	 literary	magazines	 such	 as	The 
Liberator and New Masses, personal letters, and explications of verse, Cohen’s Beleaguered
Poets and Leftist Critics examines the responses of Stevens, Cummings, 
Frost, and Williams to economic disaster and working-class suffering. Thus, Cohen 
close reads the structure, style, and content of each writer’s poetry from the 1930s 
and their resistance or conformity to the political environment. Whereas Cummings 
crafted poetic homage to the working class, Frost emphasized individualism for the 
proletariat.	Simultaneously,	as	Cohen	identifies	the	distinctive	qualities	of	each	poet,	
he also demonstrates their efforts to craft socially conscious verse.
 Although Beleaguered Poets and Leftist Critics comprehensively analyzes a 
dimension of being a modernist poet in the 1930s, Cohen could have also emphasized 
the	perils	of	literary	critics	influencing	poetic	production.	Instead	of	inspiration	guiding
the poet, leftist critics were insisting upon a criterion for literature and attempting 
to manipulate the creative process. Ironically, the leftist critics were also imposing 
a supply-and-demand dynamic for a specialized literary sub-genre and jeopardizing 
the authenticity of artistically progressive verse. Despite the aforementioned reservations,
Cohen’s book revels in the poetry and politics of the 1930s.
National Technical Institute for the Deaf,
Rochester Institute for Technology Marilyn Walker
FAITH IN THE FIGHT: Religion and the American Soldier in the Great War. By 
Jonathan H. Ebel. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 2010.
 The paucity of scholarship addressing the role of U.S. religion in the First 
World	War	underscores	that	conflict’s	secondary	status	in	the	American	imagination,	
both popular and academic. As the centennial of the start of what was the twentieth 
century’s	defining	(and	at	the	time	humanity’s	deadliest)	conflict	approaches,	“the	
Great War” is garnering renewed attention. Jonathan Ebel’s Faith in the Fight is an 
important and welcome addition to a subject too long neglected. 
 Faith in the Fight examines how various groups of Americans used religious 
“ideas, images, and beliefs” to make sense of the war, their involvement in it, and 
its	inevitable	life-changing	and	life-ending	consequences	(3).	Noting	that	traditional	
studies “of America’s wars tend to ignore religion” and those of “religion tend to 
ignore war,” Ebel proposes to study the “religious thoughts and lives of soldiers 
and war workers” (both men and women) in order to “make more intelligible
both	.	.	.	the	appeal	of	war	and	memories	of	war,	and	the	more	specific	religious	and	
political events and movements in twentieth-century America” (3). This interdisciplinary
approach, taking seriously the role of vernacular religion in wartime meaning-
 74
making, is the work’s greatest strength. In eschewing an older “history of theology” 
approach,	and	an	excessive	focus	on	official,	institutional	religion	in	favor	of	a	close	
reading of the “letters, diaries, and memoirs” of combatants and non-combatants 
alike—alongside popular wartime publications and other “public literature” such as 
“The Stars and Stripes”—and coupled with post war surveys, most notably one of 
“14,000 former soldiers, 2,400 of whom were African American,” Ebel demonstrates 
how religion “provided a vocabulary to help render the war experiences meaningful” 
(12, 16). Indeed, he illustrates how the “war provided an arena in which faith could 
be lived out” with religion simultaneously doing “a great deal of the work needed to 
romanticize war,” allowing “many soldiers to ignore or glorify war’s horrors” (16). 
 Ebel’s work is at its best when limning the cultural contexts and constraints of 
sense-making. When exploring how notions of Progressive-era “muscular Christianity”
informed notions of the Great War’s moral goodness, or how wartime ideas of 
redemptive violence were more problematic (and complex) for African Americans in 
Jim Crow America, Faith in the Fight excels. Ebel’s attention to racial differences in 
appropriating and applying a shared religious vocabulary within a DuBoisian “double 
consciousness” is illuminating. He notes how the “Christ imagined by black soldiers 
and war workers offered salvation in the midst of struggle, suffering and sorrow, but 
unlike	the	Christ	proclaimed	by	many	white	soldiers	did	not	require	sanctification	of	
the Pharaoh nation” (126). Indeed, the ability of vernacular religion to simultaneously 
enable wartime disappointment, disillusionment, and re-illusionment within and 
across differing racial and cultural-historical contexts represents the book’s greatest 
achievements. 
 So too is Ebel’s chapter on the “Soldierly heaven,” “There Are No Dead” (145). 
Religion—institutional, as well as the popular, “lived” expressions at the heart of 
Ebel’s book—are understandably central to both contemporary and ex post facto 
endeavors to render sensible “the industrialized depersonalized violence” of the Great 
War	(54).	While	Ebel	is	to	be	commended	for	going	beyond	the	basic	theological	questions
of theodicy (“why does God permit suffering?”) to show how “soldiers and war 
workers” made “sense of death and survival” (56), his appropriation of Rudolf Otto’s 
theology of the “Numinous” in the second chapter is perhaps the book’s weak point. 
That	war’s	horrific	realities	are	often	simultaneously	“awful”	and	“awe-full”	while	
(seemingly) resistant to ordinary sense-making—better suited to the deployment of 
religious vocabularies of transcendence and mysterium—should be obvious enough. 
Ebel’s otherwise thoughtful and provocative discussion is only slightly bogged down 
by this theological contextualization amidst an otherwise informative historical and 
cultural framework. Nevertheless, Faith in the Fight is a welcome—and timely—addition,
not only to the corpus of First World War cultural history, but especially for 
its creatively interdisciplinary examination of the relationship between religion and 
war. 
U.S. Army Command and General Staff College,
Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas Bradley Carter
 
 75
FROM DOUGLASS TO DUVALIER: U.S. African Americans, Haiti, and Pan 
Americanism, 1870–1964. By Millery Polyné. Gainesville: University Press of 
Florida. 2010.
	 Millery	Polyné’s	ambitious	first	book	is	a	most	welcome	addition	to	several	
fields,	including	Haiti-U.S.	relations,	foreign	policy,	and	transnational	studies.	This	
work	employs	a	cultural	lens	to	shed	light	on	the	significant,	influential,	and	understudied
relationships between Haitians and U.S. African Americans from 1870 to 
1964. Polyné encourages a new understanding of Pan Americanism—that is, acts 
and gestures of “mutual cooperation, egalitarianism, and nonintervention between 
nation-states in the Americas”—by placing Haiti at the center of this discussion (8). 
In particular, he uncovers two competing tenets of Pan Americanism: 1) a vision 
based in black (trans)nationalism that promoted racial solidarity and uplift; and 
2) one that remained U.S.-centric and often hegemonic or paternalistic. This book 
historicizes	several	vantage	points	to	reveal	the	fulfilled	and	unfulfilled	promises	of	
Pan Americanism and the implications it held for Haitian political, economic, and 
cultural development. 
 Polyné’s narrative introduces readers to some familiar and other lesser-studied 
figures.	Chapter	1	offers	a	nuanced	interpretation	of	Frederick	Douglass	that	places	
him at the crossroads of U.S. and black Pan Americanism. He explores Douglass’s 
responses to U.S. imperialism in Hispaniola from 1870 to 1891, demonstrating how 
the ambassador grew more cautious and skeptical of the United States’ promises of 
egalitarianism both at home and abroad. Chapter 2 focuses on the 1930 Robert R. 
Moton Education Commission, a goodwill initiative in which U.S. black college 
professors, administrators, and journalists examined and proposed ways to ameliorate 
Haiti’s	education	system	during	the	final	years	of	the	U.S.	occupation.	The	author	
argues that the panel’s bold suggestions—including raising teacher salaries and asking
for low-interest U.S. loans—stemmed from a transnational racial uplift project. 
Chapter 3 introduces readers to Claude Barnett, the founder of the Associated Negro 
Press.	This	particularly	strong	chapter	finds	Polyné	dissecting	the	inner	workings	
of the U.S. black press and its pivotal role in fostering diplomatic relations between 
U.S. blacks and Haitians. The author argues that Barnett championed capitalist development,
such as foreign investment and tourism, as the best way to achieve racial 
advancement. 
	 The	author	places	the	figures	and	events	from	the	text’s	final	chapters	in	the	
context of a heated Cold War that drastically changed the politics of Pan Americanism.
Chapter 4 centers around NAACP Executive Secretary Walter White and his 
efforts to launch a public relations campaign to introduce Haiti as modern and ripe 
for tourism and investment. In a similar vein, chapter 5 introduces readers to two choreographers/dancers:
Haitian Jean-Léon-Destiné and U.S. African American Lavinia 
Williams. He follows their careers in both Haiti and the United States, demonstrating 
how they served as cultural ambassadors that helped “develop Haiti through tourism 
and cultural redemption. . .” (178). In this standout chapter Polyné simultaneously 
explores the exploitation, embrace, and taming of Haitian folkloric dance—revealing 
 76
the battle for economic and cultural development and the breaking down of class and 
racial barriers. The author concludes with 1964, the year François Duvalier became 
Haiti’s	self-proclaimed	“president	for	life.”	Polyné	identifies	a	sort	of	ambivalent	
silence from U.S. blacks during this period, save for the new voices of the Haitian 
exiles. He demonstrates how Duvalier exploited U.S. Cold War imperatives to meet 
his interests. Polyné observes that this period constituted “the nadir of U.S. African 
American and Haitian relations” (205). 
 This work is remarkable for its original analysis and reevaluation of past events 
and interpretations. Polyné’s research materials are impressive and diverse, particularly
resources	acquired	at	the	Schomburg	Center	in	New	York.	His	methodology	
will surely be mimicked in the future. His transnational framework sets the bar for 
narratives that go beyond the singular nation-state and instead note the many ways—
political, cultural, social, and economic—that individuals regarded themselves as part 
of something larger. With this work, the myth of Pan Americanism as a white U.S. 
project has been shattered. Polyné has reintroduced black Pan American architects 
back into the pages of history. 
University of Massachusetts, Amherst Julio Capó, Jr.
AIRBORNE DREAMS: “Nisei” Stewardesses and Pan American World Airways. 
By Christine R. Yano. Durham: Duke University Press. 2011.
 In her book Airborne Dreams: “Nisei” Stewardesses and Pan American World 
Airways, Christine R. Yano intertwines the stories and experiences of Pan Am’s 
Japanese-American stewardesses with the iconic airline’s rise to fame and fortune 
from the 1950s–1970s. The result is a persuasive account of the gendered and racialized
labor that enabled Pan Am to rebrand itself as a racially-inclusive, cosmopolitan 
airline	that	defined	Jet	Age	travel	and	symbolized	the	United	States’	emerging	global	
power following World War II.
	 Yano	 structures	 her	 account	 along	 three	 theoretical	 strands.	The	first,	 and	
perhaps most important, frames Pan Am within the context of frontier ideology in 
an era of emergent U.S. power and globalism following World War II. The result, 
Yano suggests, is that Pan Am “used frontier language and ideas to promote itself 
as a public servant, a path breaker for America, and the leader of a new era called 
‘The Jet Age’” (8). The second situates Pan Am’s corporate culture within Japanese 
American history and the complex ways Japanese American women served as a 
model minority of femininity—and Jet Age service—amidst the backdrop of the civil 
rights	and	women’s	liberation	movements.	Her	third	and	final	framework	combines	
Pan Am’s corporate ideology as a cosmopolitan symbol of “modernity” with Nisei 
stewardesses’ experiences navigating this new frontier in the skies. 
 Yano situates her work within other studies of empire that explore the gendered, 
raced, and sexualized bodies that enable them to grow and expand. In the case of 
Pan Am, Yano suggests that the Nisei stewardess “sits at the nexus of frontier and 
cosmopolitanism. She inhabits the frontier of Pan Am’s empire exactly because of 
her assimilation, performing corporate Jet Age multiculturalism” (15).
 77
 Yano’s primary methodology relies on oral histories from Nisei stewardesses, 
and thus, the most compelling arguments in this book are those in which the women 
speak for themselves. Chapter 3, for example, examines the racialized dimensions 
of why Nisei women were seen as “ideal hostesses” for the sky, as well as how these 
racial stereotypes shaped their recruiting, hiring, and training. This is where Yano’s 
reliance on Pan Am’s corporate archives, trade publications, and the popular press 
serve as important counterpoints to the personal experiences the women recount 
in their interviews, many of whom speak highly and proudly of their time with the 
airline.	Chapter	4	offers	similar	insights	as	it	looks	at	Pan	Am’s	conflation	of	“Asianization”
with its trademark hospitality and the ways women navigated their often 
unexpected	upward	class	mobility	and	global	education	they	gained	while	flying	with	
Pan	Am.	Chapter	5	looks	at	the	unique	ways	Pan	Am	deployed	the	physical	bodies	
of the women through grooming, training, and maintaining control of their health 
and beauty regimens.
 The book concludes by examining how Nisei stewardesses managed to assimilate,
excel, and sometimes even challenge the double standards and expectations 
that were placed upon them as Pan Am employees. As members of the Japanese 
American	community	in	a	time	when	the	politics	of	race	and	gender	were	redefining
social expectations for ethnic minorities and women in the United States, Yano 
gives credit to Nisei stewardesses for “carving out their own sense of self” within 
Pan Am’s corporate framework. 
 Yano’s methodology enables her to successfully juxtapose Pan Am’s corporate 
frontier ideology with the individual experiences of its Nisei stewardesses. As a 
result, Airborne Dreams presents a compelling example of why oral histories are 
critical to countering the master narratives corporations create for themselves, their 
employees, and their customers. 
 The downside to this approach, however, is that Yano spends less time engaging
in a broader analysis of Pan Am and its connection to the United States growing 
commercial empire. Several places in the book could be strengthened by engaging 
with	historians	who	grapple	with	similar	questions	(e.g.,	Roland	Marchand,	Victoria	
DeGrazia, Emily Rosenberg). This aside, Airborne Dreams is a fascinating study 
of how the gendered, raced, and sexed bodies of Nisei stewardesses helped sustain 
and	bolster	an	airline	that	defined	an	era—and	the	United	States—during	a	period	
of	increasing	global	power	and	influence.
University of Denver  Lindsey Feitz
 
A BLACK SOLDIER’S STORY: The Narrative of Ricardo Batrell and the Cuban 
War of Independence. By Ricardo Batrell. Edited & Translated by Mark A. Sanders. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 2011.
 Midway through Ricardo Batrell’s narrative of the Cuban War of Independence, 
Para la historia: apuntes autobiographicos de la vida de Ricardo Batrell, the Cuban 
Liberation Army veteran writes, “as I said earlier in this historical narrative, some of 
our white compatriots in the war did not participate in racial discrimination. That’s 
 78
why	at	the	hour	of	sacrifice,	the	black	[sic]	was	inspired	to	lift	his	heart	like	a	brother	
to the height of the sacrosanct ideal of liberty. Black and white embraced each other, 
and so together they celebrated victory; and together they fell under the enemy’s 
steel.” Unfortunately, this spirit of interracial cooperation did not endure. Batrell 
continues, suggesting that at “the end of the war, or as soon as victory was certain, it 
became necessary to ignore or to obscure the heroism and valor of those with dark 
skin.	For	white	soldiers,	it	wasn’t	possible	to	present	blacks	as	commanding	officers	
to the privileged white families who visited us” (141). 
 Para la historia is the only known account of the Cuban War of Independence 
written by an Afro-Cuban. It delivers an intimate examination of race and national 
identity. As a chronicle of this young Afro-Cuban’s transformation through the 
struggle for “Cuba Libre,” Batrell’s narrative reveals the dynamic possibilities that 
Afro-Cubans associated with the independence movement. At the same time, it also 
conveys a sense of the profound betrayal that the author and his comrades experienced 
as ideals that they had fought for were undermined. 
	 Available	for	the	first	time	in	English	as	A Black Soldier’s Story: The Narrative 
of Ricardo Batrell and the Cuban War of Independence, Batrell’s memoir articulates 
aspirations and experiences of Afro-Cubans at the turn of the last century. Edited 
and translated by Mark A. Sanders, A Black Soldier’s Story promotes a cross-cultural 
conversation about racial democracy in the Americas. In recovering this text, Sanders 
introduces new audiences to an Afro-Cuban writer whose work corresponds with 
several African American literary contemporaries, including W. E. B. DuBois, Sutton
Griggs, and Ida B. Wells. For readers familiar with African American experience 
and U.S. history, Batrell’s narrative constructs a transnational template to analyze 
events and phenomena such as African American participation in the United States 
military and white supremacist backlash following Reconstruction. A Black Soldier’s 
Story also speaks to the impact that American constructions of race have had on U.S. 
policy in the Caribbean, including its involvement in Cuba, especially during the 
Spanish American War. Sanders’ scholarship thereby contributes to the project of 
internationalizing American studies and African American studies. 
 Initially published in 1912, as a U.S. supported Cuban regime was overseeing the 
massacre of Afro-Cubans during Cuba’s “Little Race War,” Batrell’s autobiography 
collects events from the life of an unlettered agricultural worker, propelled forward 
by his decision to resist colonialism and racism while embracing democratic ideals. 
Writing	with	the	benefit	of	hindsight,	throughout	A Black Soldier’s Story, Batrell is 
aware	that	sacrifices	he	and	other	Afro-Cubans	made	for	the	cause	of	independence	
have been overlooked and even violently rejected by Cuban elites. The memoir 
thereby becomes an expression of Batrell’s desire to participate, freely and fully, in 
the Cuban nation-building project, which he shared with countless other Afro-Cubans. 
 Sanders’ introduction to A Black Soldier’s Story connects the work to the tradition 
of the American jeremiad. He explains that Batrell “uses his experiences in the war as 
a means of commentary on postwar conditions. Very similar to the North American 
jeremiad tradition, [he] cites the ideal, decries the current political conditions that fall 
short of the ideal and calls on the nation to return to the promise of Cuba Libre” (xlviii). 
 79
A Black Soldier’s Story presents readers with good cause to review and revise those 
(all too) familiar narratives regarding Cuba and the United States. As Batrell asserts 
in the “Epilogue” of his narrative, Cuban independence was attained through black 
soldiers,	black	sacrifice,	and	black	valor.	He	writes,	“we	gave	life	to	Cuba Libre shot 
by shot, machete stroke by machete stroke” (202). A Black Soldier’s Story concludes 
with Sander’s appendix essay, where the scholar issues a proposition worthy of this 
challenging	text.	Recognizing	the	rare	conditions	and	circumstances	required	for	a	
“black	farmhand-cum-freedom	fighter	teaching	himself	to	write	these	very	pages,”	
Sanders reminds his readers that, “If [Batrell] can reach across a century to us and 
still	dare	to	rewrite	the	official	history	of	his	day,	we	can	reach	back	to	imagine	how	
an allegedly subhistorical subject might go about reclaiming his own country, how 
he might marshal the rhetoric to tell his own story” (221).
Keene State College Michael A. Antonucci
CRUEL OPTIMISM. By Lauren Berlant. Durham: Duke University Press. 2011.
 In Cruel Optimism, Lauren Berlant asks why workers stay attached to the fantasy 
of the good life when the costs of this illusion are unambiguous. Why, in short, is 
the bad life not repudiated by those it has so clearly failed? Berlant writes during a 
recession that she sees not as a temporary phase, but as the culmination of decades 
of class bifurcation, downward mobility and political, social, and environmental 
brittleness indicating the crisis of late capitalism. Yet so many workers in the West 
remain steadfastly attached to what she calls the “fantasy bribe” of the good life (7). 
What explains this “cruel optimism”? 
	 After	an	unnecessarily	difficult	and	jargon-laced	introduction,	Berlant	provides	a	
series of case studies to prove her thesis that many workers are cruelly optimistic for 
upward	mobility,	and	this	desire	is	an	obstacle	to	their	flourishing.	In	seven	loosely	
connected and uneven chapters, the book is maddening, occasionally enlightening, 
and often plain confusing. Her insightful scrutiny of the culture of freelancing, for 
instance, deftly shows how some white-collar workers disdain the job security of 
their parents’ generation. However, these free agents, who venerate individuality, then 
make unreciprocated demands on the state for a safety net without wanting to give 
up	their	flexible	ways.	As	they	age,	though,	they	too	find	themselves	participating	in	
“zombie managerial enthusiasm” only for “the right to be associated with the shell 
of an institution” (221). 
 While Berlant puts a new twist on the Marxist theory of false consciousness 
(which, curiously, she never mentions), her choice to examine this phenomenon 
through	bourgeois	forms	such	as	art-house	cinema,	obscure	fiction,	poetry,	and	academic
theory distances the author from her supposed subjects. Readers will not meet 
any actual workers here, nor will they gain much insight into the inner-workings of 
their lives. They will encounter plenty of exasperation over why “duped” subjects 
“grope their ways to survival” and cannot see the light (67).
 Berlant’s condescension is clear when she claims that many workers are not 
living at all, but merely experiencing a “slow death” (42). In the post-Fordist world 
 80
of scarcity and austerity, workers have little time for imagining a revolution, Berlant 
argues, and given the pressure to stave off total defeat, they are left with “the desire 
for a less-bad life” (179-80). Since Berlant appears to have learned about workers 
only through middle-class depictions of them, she presents an unrelenting portrayal 
of misery exacerbated by their inability to break free of the “ruthless fantasy” of 
capitalist abundance (167). 
 Berlant offers some glimmers of hope, especially in the “counternoise” of “global 
anticapitalist movements” (260). She cheers on the “variety of anarchist, cooperative, 
anticapitalist, and radical antiwork experiments” (119). Talk about cruel optimism. 
If critical theorists such as Berlant want to contribute to ending oppression and creating
a better world, they might want to meet workers on their level, and not in the 
contemptuous abstract. 
Walsh University Will Cooley
EMBATTLED ECUMENISM: The National Council of Churches, the Vietnam 
War, and the Trials of the Protestant Left. By Jill K. Gill. Dekalb: Northern Illinois 
University Press. 2011.
 Jill Gill’s critical yet sympathetic analysis of the National Council of Churches’ 
(NCC)	response	to	and	critique	of	the	Vietnam	War	provides	a	model	of	engaged	
history. Gill argues that the Vietnam War and other events of this divisive period 
challenged, splintered, and exposed the weaknesses of the NCC’s efforts against the 
war, and thus her narrative is “instructive for religious institutions that bring their 
faith into politics” (3). The book is not simply a narrative unfolding of the NCC’s 
antiwar stance, but a rich analysis of the theological foundations of an enduring ecumenical
strand of Christian faith, adding to our understanding of such varied topics 
as the decline of the mainline Protestant denominations, the clergy-laity divide that 
became such a topic of debate during this period, the rise of the Christian Right, and 
the challenge posed to institutions and bureaucratic religious authorities such as the 
NCC by secular youth and Christian laity.
 Unlike so many other works that either discount or ignore the historical precedents
of the NCC’s activism in the 1960s (for example, James Findlay’s Church 
People in the Struggle and Mark Newman’s Divine Agitators, which are otherwise 
compelling accounts of the NCC’s engagement with race and civil rights issues), Gill 
gives appropriate attention to the historical antecedents of the NCC’s antiwar activities 
by providing a brief account of the Federal Council of Churches’ international and 
domestic social activism and its ecumenical vision. She argues that Robert Bilheimer, 
who	was	a	major	figure	in	the	NCC’s	campaign	against	the	Vietnam	War	from	1966	to	
1973, sought to ground the actual strategies and proposals of the NCC in its emphasis 
on unity in the body of Christ and a common theological vision within a broader 
Christian community beyond the United States. But as Gill states so aptly, “Its belief 
that it is part of a worldwide body of Christ was tested during a time when Christian 
nationalism and American exceptionalism spiked amid a unilateral hot war that the 
 81
government saw as embedded in a global Cold War against atheistic communists” 
(390).
 Gill calls for the integration of discussions of ecumenism, especially the NCC, 
into analyses of American religious history, post-World War II U.S. history, and the 
anti-Vietnam	War	movement.	This	emphasis	on	the	role	and	influence	of	the	NCC	
is convincing, but its insistent demand to speak with President Richard Nixon, who 
vengefully excluded the NCC from the White House, and its history of intimate 
involvement	with	government	might	be	read	as	an	unseemly	quest	for	power	that	is	
an inherent tension for such a religious group that sought to “speak truth to power” 
and offer a “prophetic witness.” Gill’s work is an essential and enlightening starting 
point for future discussions about whether successors or detractors might learn from 
the NCC’s experience.
University of Chicago Divinity School Curtis J. Evans
THE ETHICS OF SIGHTSEEING. By Dean MacCannell. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 2011.
 In The Tourist: A New Theory of the Leisure Class (1976) Dean MacCannell 
examined a range of concepts including “staged authenticity” and “sightseeing and 
social structure,” and in doing so helped give academic legitimacy to the study of 
tourism. In Empty Meeting Grounds: The Tourist Papers (1992) he extended his explorations
of the topic in interesting and provocative ways. In The Ethics of Sightsee-
ing, which can be viewed as the concluding volume of his trilogy of tourism studies, 
MacCannell offers a wealth of additional insights into tourism and postmodernity. 
MacCannell proclaims that the current volume is “an ethics of SIGHTSEEING, not 
tourism” (emphasis his), and anticipates that it “will be misread as implying more” 
(xi); yet how can it not be when the word tourism, tourist, or touristic appears in the 
title of four of the book’s thirteen chapters, in the preface title, and in the titles of 
two of the book’s four parts? 
 The Ethics of Sightseeing is challenging, insightful, and frustrating all at the 
same time. Just like any group of tourists visiting a place and its residents, readers 
are likely to have responses to the work based on their own preferences and predilections
for the author’s methodological approach, which he describes as “nonsystematic 
naturalistic	observation	combined	with	scholarship”	(x).	Some	will	find	the	author’s	
periodic engagement with critics of his earlier scholarship and his boxed commentaries 
(short vignettes that appear throughout the book, drawing on personal experiences 
to	illustrate	aspects	of	his	argument)	overly	self-referential;	others	will	find	them	
instructive. The professed goal of these endeavors, MacCannell states, is to “encourage
more discussion and research into the ethics of tourism, creative ways of being 
a tourist, how tourists relate to social symbolism, and the subjectivity of sightseers” 
(xi). “The ultimate ethical test for tourists,” he adds, “is whether they can realize 
the productive potential of their travel desires or whether they allow themselves to 
become mere ciphers of arrangements made for them” (6). 
 82
 There are moments in The Ethics of Sightseeing where MacCannell moves 
beyond the all-too-common scholarly trope of tourist bashing, such as in the brief 
opening chapter, “Tourist/Other and the Unconscious,” in which the sightseer is 
actually granted the power and responsibility to “rearrange the ground of subjective 
existence”	(11).	But	at	other	times	MacCannell	launches	into	critiques	of	contemporary
(late capitalist) culture that smack of the predictable. “Today’s version of 
[Aristotle’s] ‘happiness unto death’ is ‘shop until you drop,’ and ‘the one who dies 
with the most toys wins,’” we learn (50). MacCannell adds that “in postmodernity, 
if you are not having fun, or appearing to be having fun, it means you have done 
something wrong” (51). Has contemporary culture really become so shallow, or has 
it simply become de rigueur among academics in the humanities and social sciences 
to suggest as much? Is it actually the case, as MacCannell would have it, that “the 
late capitalist city, blistered with tourist bubbles, is a glitzy crypt for the bourgeoisie 
to be buried together with their immense accumulation of commodities”? (98) Or, 
are life, tourism, sightseeing, and postmodernity as a whole a bit more nuanced than 
that? Is the mission of directing academicians and the larger sightseeing public down 
the path towards a higher ethics of sightseeing really facilitated by casually dismissing
Edmonton, Minneapolis, Las Vegas, or Orange County, California, or Dubai as 
“cultural backwaters?” (100)
 But then, in the second half of the study, MacCannell turns the table away from 
his earlier pessimism. We learn that “with effort and ethical commitment, tourists 
can access the transformative power of the city” (113) and are offered a set of ethical
guidelines to help us avoid taking the landscape (the subject of our sightseeing 
endeavors) for granted: “Become aware that every landscape contains memory. Every
square	inch	of	ground	on	which	we	walk	is	hallowed”	(37).	In	his	chapter	“The	
Bilbao Effect: Ethical Symbolic Representation,” the Guggenheim Bilbao is offered 
up as “the embodiment of creative risk taking, human exigency, and persistence in 
the face of uncertainty” (158), a model for other places to emulate, an alternative to 
the tourist bubble. Sites of painful memory—memorials to human suffering and loss 
(Holocaust museums, Ground Zero, the Peace Memorial Park in Hiroshima)—MacCannell
suggests, are manifestations of the positive intersection of “strong tourist 
ethics” and the need to face “the impossible realities of our traumatic past” (176). 
	 In	short,	then,	tourism,	in	the	first	half	of	The Ethics of Sightseeing, is largely 
presented as the embodiment of the excesses of consumer capitalism, with all its 
deleterious	cultural	consequences.	In	the	remainder	of	the	study,	tourism,	in	its	newly	
reincarnated potential forms, holds the key to the salvation of a crumbling culture. 
Some readers will wonder if this dose of redemption comes a little too late in the 
day to salvage tourism from the wreckage that MacCannell has already built around 
it.	Other	 readers	will	question	whether	MacCannell	has	effectively	 identified	 the	
problem,	or	sickness,	in	the	first	place—whether	tourism	more	broadly,	or	unethical	
sightseeing in particular is the root cause of so much cultural damage and decay, and 
if it is not, then how can more ethically grounded modes of sightseeing and tourism 
be the cure? (Is the tail of tourism wagging the dog—the larger economic, political, 
and	cultural	forces	at	play—a	little	too	effortlessly	here?)	But,	and	without	question,	
 83
all readers of this provocative study will be drawn once more into the fascinating 
conversation that MacCannell helped to begin nearly four decades ago, and in that 
regard the author’s intentions are certainly borne out.
University of Oklahoma  David M. Wrobel
GARY: The Most American of All American Cities. By S. Paul O’Hara. Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press. 2011.
 Gary: The Most American of All American Cities is an analysis of Gary, Indiana 
as imagined mostly through the narratives of those who lived outside of the city. 
Created in 1906 by U.S. Steel, its “physical spaces were built by and controlled by 
U.S. Steel but its narrative” was shaped by multiple others with varied visions of its 
meaning and purpose (9-10). For U.S. Steel, it “was not simply capital relocation but 
an	opportunity	for	vast	expansion	and	efficient	production	.	.	.	and	an	opportunity	to	
create industrial order with no intention of designing a city of benevolence or social 
responsibility that catered to workers.” Indeed, argues S. Paul O’Hara, U.S. Steel’s 
greatest accomplishment may have been its construction of a city that manifestly 
separated	 the	flow	of	work	and	community.	For	 reformers	 in	 the	early	 twentieth	
century,	it	presented	a	model	city	of	“order	and	efficiency”	and	a	“lost	opportunity	
to implement new planning strategies” (70). For populists, it was a violent frontier 
similar to America’s Wild West, where men sought prospects in a new terrain characterized
by violence and economic opportunities. For President Woodrow Wilson, 
and like-minded others, it was an aberration—an example of monopoly capitalism 
that was indefensible in its ability to undermine the success of Americans. By midcentury,
for the workers, it was a place of home, employment, and families. It was 
simultaneously a place of communities separated by race and ethnicities and the 
strife that accompanied these persistent American dilemmas. Overall, according to 
O’Hara, the dynamic images and realities of Gary are contradictory and convoluted, 
ranging from utopian, dystopian, adventurous, and dangerous, as well as a site of 
worker strength and activism.
 Regardless of how the city was imagined, by the end of the twentieth century, 
Gary, like many of America’s Midwestern industrial suburbs, had become the image
of the heartland’s decay. Like Benton Harbor, Michigan, and East St. Louis, 
Illinois,	it	was	a	place	that	once	housed	manufacturing,	robust	neighborhoods,	quality
education, and social and economic opportunities. Now it seems, they are places 
abandoned by the corporations which they were designed to serve. Their populations 
have declined and shifted from majority white to African American, infrastructures 
have been devastated, and residents suffer from high rates of poverty, unemployment, 
and failing educational systems. How, then, do imaginings of a city help us to make 
sense of the facts of the city, its residents, and their everyday lives?
 Overall, O’Hara provides a historiography that captures and emphasizes the 
multiple and varied imaginings of a place. A city, after all, is more than just its physical
space. It is also what it represents and means for the past, present, and future of a 
society. O’Hara’s work highlights the need to appreciate the role places play in our 
 84
conceptualization of social, economic, political, and cultural values, change, direction, 
and popular memory. Gary, Indiana was a place of contention, and professional and 
public	intellectuals	fought	to	define	its	potential,	purpose,	and	fundamental	meaning
for what America had become and where its future was headed. It seems from 
O’Hara’s critical synthesis, those outside the city saw the promise and problems of 
Gary as a model American city. 
 What seems less clear is how the envisioned city was complicated by imaginings 
and realities of the Gary residents themselves. How, for example, did the U.S. Steel 
workers, parents, teachers, and municipal leaders think about Gary, Indiana and how 
did they understand its purpose? What meaning did they give to the city space and 
macrostructure with which they engaged? What meaning did imaginings by outsiders 
actually have for local daily lives and socioeconomic policies? How were the physical 
mappings of Gary contradictory or not to the promise and problems that those living 
within its boundaries understood? Cities are not abstract. They interplay not only 
with popular and political imaginings, but also real life and its shifting ecological 
systems.	What	is	most	significant	about	this	study	of	Gary,	Indiana	is	that	it	broadens	
how scholars can conceptualize and methodologically approach the sociohistorical 
study of place, distinguish its multiple meanings, and concretize the meaning of the 
city imagined.
University of Kansas Jennifer F. Hamer
GENDER, RACE, AND MOURNING IN AMERICAN MODERNISM. By Greg 
Forter. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2011.
 Greg Forter offers a challenging thesis in Gender, Race, and Mourning in American
Modernism, examining	five	canonical	texts	as	expressions	of	loss	in	“response	
to changes in the sex/gender and racial systems that took place between 1880 and 
1920” (1). He merges cultural studies of manhood with psychoanalytic theories of 
mourning, scholarship on trauma, and literary close reading.
 Forter’s introduction provides an overview of nineteenth-century American 
masculinity and its transformation under monopoly capitalism as groundwork for “the 
affective genealogy of modernist misogyny” that follows (9). Central to his argument 
is the masculine/feminine dynamic within prescriptive gender roles: authors “came 
to yearn for a masculinity less rigidly polarized against the feminine” even as they 
could not “avoid internalizing the imperatives of the emerging gender order” (4). 
Working through this psychic ambivalence, which Forter grafts onto Freud’s mourning
and melancholia, was “decisive to the emergence of canonical modernism” (4).
 The work’s strengths are the fascinating analysis of gender intersecting race and 
the	keen	scrutiny	of	narrative	strategy.	The	first	chapter	reads	The Great Gatsby as 
allegory of the loss of male creativity embodied in lyrical Gatsby, a style of manhood 
“that cannot but be lost” (15). Fitzgerald’s “impersonal form” (16), the distancing 
imposed	by	the	entangled	first-person	narrator,	are	persuasively	examined.	Chapter	
2 adds new insights into Hemingway’s The Sun Also Rises by reading Jake’s wound 
and	the	novel’s	phallic	fixation	as	a	melancholic	reaction	to	modernity’s	destabilized	
 85
gender. Jake’s impotence and Romero’s primitive masculinity reveal the impossibility 
of manhood. This “fetishistic melancholia” insists “that men are cut off from both 
(racialized)	primality	and	expressive	‘femininity’	while	preserving	these	in	rigidified,	
affectively deadened, unenlivening form” (57). Hemingway’s iconic style encodes 
this principle, “gesture[ing] toward affective communication while barring it from 
representation” (94).
 The Freudian primal scene provides entrée to Faulkner’s use of history in Light 
in August and Absalom, Absalom! Each text’s primal scene exposes the trauma 
inflicted	by	historical	patriarchy,	racism,	and	class	inequity.	Psychical	and	physical	
violence are transmitted between characters and, via narrative strategies, to readers. 
These characters at once pass on and hold onto their melancholy over the destruction 
of white Southern masculinity, modeling the means of “working through” a trauma 
ultimately proven inevitable. Finally, Cather’s “The Professor’s House” is interpreted 
as the failure of the maternal and primitive racial other under modern capitalism. The 
“Afterword” considers the “afterlife of canonical modernism’s melancholy aesthetic” 
in three contemporary works (178). 
 Forter’s work offers much to scholars of modernist American literature, but 
less to cultural studies. Novels are treated as cultural artifacts revealing their authors’
and the larger cultural ambivalence, but the study focuses on psychoanalytic 
theory rather than cultural analysis. Perhaps because of the argument’s complexity, 
the	writing	is	at	times	opaque,	overstated,	and	reliant	on	“on	one	hand,	on	the	other	
hand” constructions. Contributing to ongoing conversations in cross-disciplinary 
literary and American Studies, Gender, Race, and Mourning in American Modernism
accomplishes Forter’s goal of “enrich[ing] contemporary understandings of both 
modern and modernist masculinity” (7).
Illinois College Beth Widmaier Capo
GOD’S ARBITERS: Americans and the Philippines, 1898–1902. By Susan K. Harris. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 2011.
I am a great and sublime fool. But then I am God’s fool, and all 
His work must be contemplated with respect.
 Susan K. Harris has assembled an impressive archive for God’s Arbiters: Americans
and the Philippines, 1898–1902 consisting of congressional debates, political 
speeches, textbooks, novels, newspaper editorials, letters to the editor, sermons, short 
stories, memoirs, poems, essays, letters, and cartoons that disclose the racialized 
religious discourse with which turn-of-the-century Americans deliberated over the 
annexation of the Philippines. The book’s argumentative line builds upon themes 
familiar to scholars working on a comparative history of imperial and anti-imperial 
formations. Harris’s description of White Anglo-Saxon Protestantism as underpinning 
the contentions of anti-annexationists as well as American imperialists complicates 
Reginald Horsman’s account of this belief structure in Race and Manifest Destiny: 
Origins of American Racial Anglo-Saxonism; her explanations	of	the	significance	
 86
of	the	Empire	to	the	formation	of	United	States	national	identity	confirms	the	core	
insight of Amy Kaplan’s magisterial Anarchy and Empire; Harris’s account of the 
involvement of U.S. religious organization in the Americanization of the Philippines
complements Ian Tyrell’s conjectures in Reforming the World: The Creation 
of America’s Moral Empire (2010). 
 Harris’s compelling readings of key texts in U.S. culture and history at the 
inception of U.S. imperialism also importantly contributes to current debates over 
textbooks, Christian nationalism, and the Unites States’ role in global Realpolitik. But 
Harris assigns her project an additional purpose at the book’s conclusion where she 
gives expression to the hope that the discourse she has elaborated in God’s Arbiters 
“will help us understand some of the conversations that we are having in the twentyfirst
century,	especially	as	those	conversations	rest	on	assumptions	about	religion,	
race, and what it takes to be an ‘American’” (204).
 The discourse to which Harris refers was generated out of a symbiosis of evangelical
Protestant theology and liberal democratic ideals. The discourse emerged 
at the moment in United States history when White Protestant Anglo-Saxon ideals 
confronted the racial and religious realities of imperial expansionism at the turn of 
the century. The complex interdependence of the theological and political elements 
of this discourse supplied the basis for often contentious discussions of the United 
States government’s discordant responsibilities to the domestic republic and to the 
global order in the age of Empire.
 Until 1898, the United States government was unwilling to assume the political, 
administrative, and moral burdens of a colonizing power. But in December 1898, the 
Treaty of Paris forced Spain to give up Guam, Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines. 
God’s Arbiters specifically	focuses	on	the	role	this	discourse	played	in	re-configuring	
the core attributes of U.S. national identity—White Protestant Christianity, AngloSaxon
capitalism, and enlightenment political rationality—after the Treaty of Paris 
brought all three into crisis. 
 The constitution may have provided the textual basis for the nation’s ruling 
political ideals, but, according to Harris, the discourse forged to engage the Treaty 
of	Paris	fortified	it	with	a	theological	subtext	that	endowed	Americans	with	the	divinely
ordained mission to decide on the destinies of nations across the world. Harris 
traces the origins of Americans’ felt responsibility to educate and uplift racially and 
religiously inferior cultures to a complex dynamic animating the national mythos: 
Imagining itself within a mythic national history that credited 
the	country’s	material	success	on	its	unique	fusions	of	Enlightenment
and Protestant thought, [the United States] incorporated 
an evangelical mission to broadcast its formula to the rest of the 
world. At the same time, its own racial ideologies rejected the 
possibility that non-Anglo-Saxon Protestants could ever emulate 
the American story . . . [because] for all their efforts, Americans 
could not replicate themselves in the Philippines, nor, at bottom, 
did they wish to do so. (81)
 87
 Harris divides her book into three sections. God’s Arbiters opens with “American 
Narratives” describing the national myths that authorized the religious (Protestant) 
and racial (white) bases of U.S. national identity; turns in “Creating Citizens” to an 
examination	of	the	historical	moment	when	U.S.	citizens	struggled	over	conflicting	
representations of the relationship between the domestic national republic and its 
emergent global empire; and concludes with an explanation in “The Eyes of the 
World” of the role the discourse constructed by “God’s arbiters” played in negotiating
national and international responses to this crisis. 
 A Twain scholar, Susan K. Harris makes deft use of excerpts from Mark 
Twain’s writings to elucidate how he constructed the persona of “God’s arbiter” to 
devise criteria with which to adjudicate the disputes between expansionists and antiannexationists.
In the following passage, Harris explains how Twain’s contradictory 
amalgamation of democratic political principles and Protestant theological dicta 
rendered	him	the	ideal	typification	of	“God’s	arbiter”:
Mark	Twain’s	own	contradictions	reflect	the	contradictions	that	
characterized white Americans generally. . . . Growing up among 
Protestants who took white supremacy for granted, regarded 
Catholics as dangerous aliens, and taught children that America’s 
civil liberties were invented during the Protestant Reformation 
. . . [and] came to his anti-imperialism only after judging that 
America was betraying its own principles by forcibly annexing the 
Philippines.	But	he	did	not	relinquish	his	belief	that	the	country,	
by virtue of its own history and institutions, should serve as a 
moral model for the rest of the world. (7)
	 As	justification	for	her	selection	of	Twain	as	the	ideal	personification	of	“God’s	
arbiter,” Harris calls attention to the secularized sermons in which Twain denounced 
the moral depredation underpinning the nation’s imperial policies. For example, after 
President William McKinley characterized the war in the Philippines as a civilizing 
mission designed to spread the Christian gospel and economic prosperity to beleaguered
savages, Twain composed an address “To the Person Sitting in Darkness” 
re-describing the motivation for the United States’ presence in the Philippines as an 
expansionist operation undertaken to exploit Filipino labor, extract Filipino natural 
resources, and destroy Filipino native customs. 
 Twain drew the title for this jeremiad with a laudation from Matthew 4:16 —“The 
people who sat in darkness have seen a great light!” He supplied the means whereby 
his benighted contemporaries might be comparably illumined with the exhortation 
“Come home and Christianize Christians in the states!” According to Harris, it was 
Twain’s	irreverent	burlesquing	of	a	repertoire	of	religious	forms—jeremiad,	prophecy,	
prayer, confession, and liturgical procession—in his satiric homilies that replenished 
their	quasi-juridical	efficacy.	However,	the	discursive	space	Twain	carved	out	to	adjudicate
disputes over the legitimacy of the nation’s imperial designs was not continuous 
with the contentions of either the annexationists or the anti-annexationists. Twain 
 88
demonstrated his power to adjudicate their dispute at the site where their arguments 
converged in the conviction that “the United States was a nation of white Protestants 
under a special mandate from God to represent freedom and fair dealing to the rest 
of the world.” 
 Although this site was the unacknowledged locus of Twain’s pronouncements 
in “To the Person Sitting in Darkness,” Twain explicitly took up this position in “In 
Defense of General Funston” when he pronounced his condemnation of the treacherous
perfidy	Colonel	Frederick	Funston	committed	in	capturing	General	Aguinaldo	
during the Philippine-American War. In the following passage from “In Defense of 
General Funston,” Twain established his juridical authority with an image of himself 
as set within a nexus of Protestant virtue and the nation’s foundational principles:
Doubt—doubt that we did right by the Filipinos—is rising steadily 
higher and higher in the nation’s breast; conviction will follow 
doubt. The nation will speak; its will is law; there is no other 
sovereign on this soil; and in that day we shall right such unfairnesses
as	we	have	done.	We	shall	let	go	our	obsequious	hold	on	
the rear-skirts of the sceptered land-thieves of Europe, and be what 
we were before, a real World Power, and the chiefest of them all, 
by right of the only clean hands in Christendom, the only hands 
guiltless of the sordid plunder of any helpless people’s stolen 
liberties, hands recleansed in the patriotism of Washington, and 
once	more	fit	to	touch	the	hem	of	the	revered	Shade’s	garment	
and stand in its presence unashamed. 
 By invoking the ideal of restorative justice that will return after “we” doubt that 
“we	did	right	by	the	Filipinos,”	Twain	has	not	ratified	any	extant	judgments	about	
the issue. Rather than denouncing Funston’s actions in the name of a pre-existing 
anti-imperialist standpoint, Twain enunciates his decision in the future perfect tense 
and	in	the	name	of	a	“conviction”	that	will	have	arisen	consequent	to	the	American	
people’s doubts over the fairness of the state’s actions. Twain assigned the authority 
for this judgment to the return from futurity of the past representation of the United 
States as “the only clean hands in Christendom, the only hands guiltless of the sordid 
plunder of any helpless people’s stolen liberties, hands recleansed in the patriotism 
of Washington.” The presupposition informing this remarkable speech act is not that 
“we” (the American people) will recover the heights of Protestant-patriotism from 
which we have fallen, but that futurity will have added the position of “real World 
Power” to the United States’ past reputation as possessor of the “only clean hands 
in Christendom.” 
 In both “To the Person Sitting in Darkness” and “In Defense of General Funston” 
Mark Twain has exercised the power of a global imperator authorized by the United 
States’ “real World Power” to mediate between antagonistic representations of the 
relationship between the U.S. as a domestic national republic and as an emergent 
global empire. “Imperator” is a term used in Roman law to describe a magistrate 
 89
whose acts of judgment differed from those handed down by other arbiters in that 
they	bore	the	authority	of	the	empire.	Twain	quite	literally	personified	this	figure	
when he enunciated the ethico-political judgment that when the United States will 
have reclaimed its true identity as the only Christian power with clean hands, it also 
will have set itself apart as the only geo-political entity capable of resolving crises 
in the global order. 
 I have also used the term “global imperator” to register my sole criticism of 
Susan Harris’s remarkable manuscript. Unlike Harris, I think the ethico-juridical 
disposition	animating	Twain’s	“theological	burlesques”	differs	from	the	racializedreligious
discourse Harris attributes to “God’s arbiters” in that they satirize the belief 
that “the purity of the [white] race and its language was undermined by the contact 
between Americans and the inhabitants of [the] archipelago” (119). 
 Harris concludes her impressively researched and brilliantly conceptualized 
manuscript with a cautionary moral allegory designating Twain the chief representative
of the national mission to which he in fact took exception: “The sense of 
national mission that animated Twain and his contemporaries endures: Americans 
cannot	relinquish	the	conviction	that	they	are	God’s	arbiters,	appointed	to	mediate	
the	destinies	of	mankind”	(204).	Moreover,	while	I	find	the	homologies	Harris	has	
adduced between the American military’s decision to attack and kill more than six 
hundred Muslim villagers in the 1906 Moro Crater Massacre and the death and destruction
Hank	Morgan	visited	on	sixth-century	Catholic	Britain	quite	compelling,	I	
do not agree with Harris’s claim that Twain shared Morgan’s or the state’s hostility 
toward Catholics. 
 Unlike Harris, I think the ethico-juridical disposition inciting Twain’s “theological
burlesques”	explicitly	satirized	the	racialized-religious	discourse	Harris	attributes	
to “God’s arbiters.” Twain’s speech acts differed from the forms of power that passed 
through the state’s colonial juridical and pedagogical apparatuses in that he did not 
assume that native Filipinos’ Catholicism rendered them unable “to develop the 
Protestant passion for truth and with it, the intellectual rigor necessary for modern 
rationality” (116). Rather than distancing himself from the Filipinos and Cubans who 
had become the targets of the United States’ divine violence, Twain took up common
cause with the Latin American nationalists José Martí, Rubén Darío, and José 
Enrique	Rodó,	and	the	Filipino	activists	Emilio	Aguinaldo,	Apolinario	Mabini,	and	
José Rizal, all of whom echoed his condemnation of the U.S. religious hypocrisy, 
cultural arrogance, racism, and materialism (154-76). 
 In an effort to support the claim that Twain had internalized the ethnophobia 
that he in fact excoriated, Harris describes Twain’s relationship to the writings of 
his Filipino and Cuban allies “as a continuation of the religious struggle of the Reformation”
(163). But in “The Stupendous Procession” and “My Last Thought” (that 
Twain may have considered too “un-American” to publish during his lifetime), Twain 
alluded to the writings of Rizal and Aguinaldo to denounce the notoriously unjust 
criteria	invented	by	the	U.S.	politicians	and	jurists	to	legalize	the	unequal	distribution	
of rights, liberties, and conditions of belonging in the infamous Insular Cases. 
 90
 I do not intend the proposition that Mark Twain satirized the racist and ethnophobic
disposition of the WASP men and women Susan Harris has named “God’s 
arbiters” as a criticism of her remarkable book. Unlike Harris or the divine arbiters 
under her inspection, Twain preferred to imagine himself “God’s fool” so that he 
could call attention to the vanity and folly of a nation that mistook its ambition to 
become planetary imperator as God’s will.
Dartmouth College Donald Pease
GUANTÁNAMO: An American History. By Jonathan M. Hansen. New York: Hill 
and Wang. 2011.
 Guantánamo might seem narrow as a topic of study, but the author places it in 
broader contexts, which it also serves to illuminate. Geological prehistory, personal 
stories of women, workers, racial minorities, political and military developments, 
continental	diplomacy,	and	constitutional	issues	all	figure	in	the	story.	The	overriding	
theme is the tragic incompatibility of liberty, the announced aim of U.S. policy, with 
its true objective: imperial control.
 Hansen depicts Guantánamo Bay as a stage on which America’s (and before that 
Spain	and	Britain’s)	imperial	ambitions	played	out.	He	makes	frequent	allusions	to	
the	wider	Caribbean	setting	that	defined	Guantánamo’s	strategic	value	for	American	
policy makers long before it came under U.S. control. Hansen recounts little-known 
but fascinating episodes such as the British-led occupation of the bay during the War 
of Jenkins’ Ear, an episode in which hundreds of North American colonists participated,
and he provides welcome detail on familiar ones such as the tense negotiations 
between the U.S. government and delegates to the Cuban Constitutional Convention 
over the terms of Cuba’s independence. 
 Hansen makes effective use of social history to personalize the story of imperialism.
He notes that in its heyday, Guantánamo was touted as an idealized American 
town, “the ultimate gated community,” but it was a town that enforced racial discrimination
(236). Moreover it could not escape the fact that it was a military base 
in	the	tropics.	Navy	wives	suffered	from	tedium	when	the	fleet	was	away	and	from	
excessive male attention when it returned. U.S. labor laws did not apply to Cuban or 
Jamaican workers on the base while prostitution and other vices illegal in the U.S. 
flourished	just	outside.
 Sometimes Hansen seems excessive in his condemnation of the U.S.—he gives 
too little credit to turn-of-the-century anti-imperialists, and his claim that Fidel Castro 
sought good relations with the U.S. until he was rebuffed in the spring of 1959 seems 
naïve. On the other hand, he cites evidence that the U.S. War Department wanted to 
prolong the Cuban insurrection of the 1890s in the cynical hope that “the extermination”
of both sides would facilitate the island’s annexation. And it is dispiriting to 
learn that the Kennedy administration contemplated manufacturing an “incident” at 
Guantánamo to justify an invasion of the island by U.S. troops. Hansen’s last two 
chapters	detail	the	horrific	treatment	of	Haitian	refugees	and	military	detainees	of	
“The War on Terror,” practices that were facilitated by Guantánamo’s status as an 
 91
imperial enclave. They make for painful but salutary reading and go far to vindicate 
the author’s thesis.
 Some minor issues mar this otherwise excellent book. It is silent on Guantánamo’s
role in U.S. imperial adventures in the early twentieth century. Additional 
maps would have been helpful in places such as the detailed account of the arrival 
of U.S. forces in 1898. A bibliography would also have been useful. Finally, the text 
would	benefit	from	more	careful	copy	editing	(e.g.,	“U.S.	military	planners	expected	
to	begin	the	war	not	[in	Cuba,	but	in?]	in	Puerto	Rico”	on	page	86	and	“flout”	for	
flaunt	on	page	190).
Calvin College Daniel R. Miller
HOW TO BE SOUTH ASIAN IN AMERICA: Narratives of Ambivalence and Belonging.
By Anupama Jain. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 2011.
 In How to Be South Asian in America, Anupama Jain provides an impressive 
accounting of scholarly literature on diasporic identity and assimilation, attentive 
readings	of	South	Asian	American	novels	and	films,	and	a	model	for	new	directions	in	
the	interdisciplinary	field	of	“Asian	American	postcolonial	feminist	cultural	studies”	
(14). The book centers on South Asian immigrant “reckoning[s]” with the American 
Dream, a myth that continues to serve as the stick by which we measure immigrant 
“success” and belonging (24). Jain argues that by reading the often contradictory 
narratives of various constituencies (post-1965 immigrants, Indo-Caribbeans, and 
second-generation Indian Americans) we can see that far from being an agreed upon 
and achievable goal, the American Dream is a roughly hued landscape that has the 
potential to be resurfaced and reimagined by successive immigrant groups. Jain calls 
this process of Americanization, “one among a globalized set of processes representing 
how people negotiate being part of a collective” (12). Americanization, the term she 
prefers	to	the	essentialist	and	unidirectional	“assimilation,”	“reflect[s]	the	evolving	
cultural	and	material	investments	of	different	constituencies”	(12).	This	definition	
encapsulates the book’s four key thrusts: 1) an insistence on reading Americanization 
transnationally, 2) a consideration of the symbolic side-by-side with the material, 
3) an attention to the politics of belonging as “a universal experience” (228), and 
4) the utilization of ambivalence as a lever to expose the multiple and contradictory 
allegiances, desires, and narratives of South Asian immigrants in the U.S.
	 Americanization’s	transnational,	figurative,	and	material	nature	are	well-theorized
in	the	introduction	and	first	chapter,	“Reading	Assimilation	and	the	American	
Dream as Transnational Narratives,” and actualized in chapter 2, an original ethnography
of Indo-Guyanese immigrants who were actively courted by Schenectady city 
officials	during	the	last	decade.	Nevertheless,	these	strands	are	somewhat	unevenly	
developed throughout the rest of the book. In chapter 3, “South Asian Novels of 
Americanization,” and chapter 4, “Independent Films about Second-Generation South 
Asian Americans,” Jain reads the novels of Meena Alexander, Bharati Mukherjee, and 
Bapsi	Sidwha,	along	with	the	spate	of	Indian	American	identity	films	from	around	the	
turn of this century. On one hand, in their antecedence to or silence about momentous 
 92
shifts in geopolitics (9/11 and the “War on Terror,” India’s rising status, “reverse migration”
trends),	these	texts	do	not	offer	sufficient	material	to	make	a	strong	case	for	
their immediate relevance in an age of securitization and globalization. On the other 
hand, they do allow Jain to pay close attention to how subjects negotiate multiple 
national, community, and familial imperatives to assimilate and maintain authenticity 
with their own ambitions for self-actualization, economic security, and a sense of 
belonging in a more general sense. She proves herself a skillful and attentive reader, 
able to bring theoretical insights to bear on the texts, but also able to bring forth the 
texts’ own ambivalent, fraught, mundane, and at times joyous conclusions about the 
necessity of Americanization. 
 This ethic of reading and her groundbreaking work on recently arrived and 
working-class	Indian	immigrants	from	Guyana	are	Jain’s	most	significant	interventions.
Postcolonial	scholars	have	tended	to	privilege	a	politicized	definition	of	diaspora	
that utilizes diasporic narratives to challenge hegemonic ideologies of nation, racial 
essentialism, and cultural identity (37-38). In this clear preference for anti-hegemonic 
gestures, progressive discussions of diaspora tend toward the prescriptive rather than 
descriptive,	often	castigating	texts	and	authors	who	do	not	sufficiently	exemplify	
the scholar’s politics (32). Jain very consciously refuses to make such judgments. 
Assimilation	is	redefined	and	then	taken	seriously	within	the	context	of	often	paradoxical
attempts to make a life for oneself in America.
University of California, Irvine Priya J. Shah
IMPRISIONED IN A LUMINOUS GLARE: Photography and the African American 
Freedom Struggle. By Leigh Raiford. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 
Press. 2011.
 Leigh Raiford’s examination of photography’s participation during three critical
moments in African American history is an exemplary and engaging work that 
advances the conversation of African Americans and the making of America, then 
and now. Raiford’s text is thick with detailed evidence to back up her penetrating 
and provocative analysis. Raiford employs three interrogation sites, the black body, 
the black eye, and black memory to view the photographic image at the edges, the 
center, and over time. 
 Chapter 1 looks at the anti-lynching campaign of the early twentieth century 
and the work of Ida B. Wells and the NAACP to transform and reframe the photography
of	lynching	into	anti-lynching	photography.	She	explores	the	question	of	how	
capturing the abject black body can be used to reverse the dominant discourse and 
serve	as	a	unifying	mode	of	identification	that	would	promote	social	justice.
 In chapter 2 Raiford looks at the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee 
(SNCC), one of the key civil rights groups who recognized the importance of photography
to not only document but also serve as a means to engage the community 
and gain some control over media communication. 
 Raiford, in chapter 3, discusses the “insurgent visibility” of the Black Panther 
Party (BPP). While earlier SNCC photographs had brought individuals like Bob 
 93
Moses from Harlem to the south, the “heightened visibility” of the Black Panther 
Party recruited blacks in the north to take a stand in their own neighborhoods. The 
Black Panther Party knew a key site to wage their battle for black liberation was 
in	the	field	of	visibility,	image	making,	and	performance.	The	Black	Panther	Party	
sought	to	revise	the	definition	of	the	black	body,	and	treat	black	people	as	looking	
subjects worthy of direct address. This was done, in part, by the party uniform, the 
black beret, leather jackets, afro, and the creative use of photographic images. 
	 In	 her	final	 chapter,	Raiford	 engages	us	 in	 the	present	moment	 through	her	
analysis of the Without Sanctuary: Lynching Photography in America (2000) traveling
exhibit that displayed photographs from the anti-lynching period; the fortieth 
anniversary of the BPP Black Panther Rank and File (2006) show displaying amateur 
and professional photography of the BPP, and contemporary artwork inspired by the 
BPP movement; and the Road to Freedom: Photographs of the Civil Rights Movement, 
1956–1968 exhibit (2008) at the High Museum in Atlanta commemorating the fortieth 
anniversary of Martin Luther King’s assassination with close to two hundred images 
of the civil rights era. Raiford examines the meaning of these historical photographs 
for contemporary audiences. 
 As noted earlier, Leigh Raiford’s work adds a welcomed voice and perspective 
to the visual dialogue between past and present, as we attempt to understand the 
significant	role	photography	played	in	visualizing	the	black	material	subject,	black	
spectatorship, and black memory. 
California State University, Chico Maurice L. Bryan Jr.
MEDGAR EVERS: Mississippi Martyr. By Michael Vinson Williams. Fayetteville: 
University of Arkansas Press. 2011.
 Successfully written as a greater representation of a man and his impact on civil 
rights, the book Medgar Evers: Mississippi Martyr covers so much more material 
than the title entails. Williams sought out and discovered more than just who Medgar 
Evers was as a civil rights activist, but also the character of the man. These characteristics
made Evers into the person destined make a difference in Mississippi. Evers, 
an intelligent black man in the racist south, was so passionate about civil rights in 
Mississippi	that	his	quest	for	equality	would	conclude	with	his	untimely	death.	
 The expanse of this book and the author’s detailed research goes beyond just 
the life of Evers. Williams also gives the reader an idea of what life in Jim Crow 
Mississippi was for the black man and his family. In addition, Williams visited the 
family	and	relatives	still	living	as	of	today	and	recorded	first-hand	recollections	of	
Medgar Evers and his impact on the people in his everyday life. Medgar grew up 
surrounded	by	examples	of	manhood	and	self-sufficiency,	which	molded	his	independent
character and cultivated a devotion to the welfare of humankind (16). 
 Other aspects of Medgar Evers are brought to light while reading this book. 
The author gives a historical explanation of key moments in the life of this man that 
go beyond that of the immediate family. The author provides an historical study of 
the NAACP and how they developed such a presence in Mississippi. The murder 
 94
of Emmett Till in Money, Mississippi in 1955 is also analyzed by Williams and the 
effect it had on Evers. Myrlie Evers recalled that “Medgar cried when he found that 
this had happened to Emmett Till.” He cried “out in frustration and anger.” Evers 
played a large role in investigating the Till murder and sending accounts of events 
to	NAACP	headquarters	for	publication	in	northern	newspapers	(125).
 Evers’ loyalty to the state of Mississippi and his ideology for the progressiveness 
of the state never changed. He followed the accounts of the Montgomery, Alabama 
Bus Boycott and visualized the same actions in Mississippi. He saw school integration
in Arkansas and hoped for the same results in his home state. Evers longed to 
become a lawyer, attempting to integrate the University of Mississippi Law School; 
leaving the state for any reason was not an option. He died for his cause: a Mississippi
where	everyone	would	be	treated	equally.	
 The book Medgar Evers: Mississippi Martyr is an attempt to get into the world of 
Medgar Evers. The author of the book does accomplish this feat. His style of writing 
and educational background displays itself with every word. In depth in presentation, 
this book is excellent for an undergraduate exhaustive class study of Evers and rural 
Mississippi life. It is possible for this book to be used in high schools as well, but 
advanced	readers	would	benefit	more	from	the	text.	
University of South Alabama Paula L. Webb
OPPORTUNITY DENIED: Limiting Black Women to Devalued Work. By Enobong 
Hanna Branch. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. 2011. 
 Opportunity Denied: Limiting Black Women to Devalued Work is an examination
of the evolution of black women’s work in the U.S. from the end of slavery 
into	the	twenty-first	century.	In	sum,	the	author	offers	a	convincing	argument	that	
black women, regardless of time and place, have been limited to the lowest rungs 
of occupational ladders. The status is not incidental but rather the outcome of white 
racism (on the part of women and men) and the intersection of employer racial and 
gender discrimination. Branch does not deny progress but asserts that steadfast occupational
segregation	by	race	and	gender	has	historically	defined	black	women’s	
place	and	experience	at	the	“bottom	of	the	labor	queue”	and	this	remains	unchanged	
in the contemporary period.
 Branch uses intersectional theory as a lens through which to understand the impact
of race and gender on black women’s work. Consistent with this approach, she 
argues	neither	one	nor	the	other	alone	is	sufficient	to	explain	the	systems	of	power	
and	oppression	that	define	these	experiences.	Together,	these	variables	outline	how	
racism and sexism have worked in the past and persist into the present to locate black 
women in a disadvantaged market position, at the bottom of hierarchies of authority 
and power.
 The subject of black women’s experiences and labor as products of race and 
intersectionality is not a new intervention to the literature. Branch, though a sociologist,
offers a well-developed and insightful historiography of the scholarship on the 
 95
subject. Much of her evidence, for example, builds on contemporary classic works 
of	historians	and	social	scientists	alike,	such	as	Jacqueline	Jones,	Judith	Rollins,	as	
well as David Roediger. This synthesis is essential to contextualizing the detailed 
trends of black women’s labor that are illustrated throughout the text. I would argue 
that the strength of the monograph is the effective blending and use of labor market 
data available through the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, a product of the 
U.S. Census Bureau that provides researchers access to untabulated historical data 
on housing units and people. 
 The book is well-organized thematically and chronologically (primarily from 
1860–1960) around the type of work to which black women were restricted. Of course, 
during slavery this was agricultural and domestic servitude. This changed little as 
the population shifted into freedom and the twentieth century. Despite attempts to 
withdraw from farm labor, black women were coerced back into this “nontraditional” 
women’s work because of white demand for their labor. Black women in domestic 
service were, argues the author, “explicitly tied to the destination of household labor 
as women’s work.” However, black women’s ability to move into these latter positions 
outside the south was due to the desire of white women to distance themselves from 
this dirty, onerous, disdainful employment. While the changes for black women have 
been	dramatic	since	the	1960s,	Branch	tempers	these	gains	against	the	“artificially	
low wages in early decades of the twentieth century because of black women’s severe 
underrepresentation in desirable and lucrative jobs.” By 2008, black women were still 
unevenly tied to sex-segregated occupations, in which they fell at the wage and skill 
bottoms. How about skilled and educated black women? Have they fared better than 
those stationed at lower levels? By mid-twentieth century, educated black women, 
Branch asserts, advanced primarily due to opportunities in the public sector: health, 
social services, and education. However, this also meant that they were most vulnerable
to public sector austerity that led to layoffs, early retirements, and downsizing 
of federal, state, and local governments. 
 For many, it is more popularly palatable to use those at the heights of income 
levels and success as measures of progress. Multimillionaire media giants such as 
Oprah Winfrey and Beyonce Knowles, Professors Anita Hill and Melissa Harris-Perry, 
political	figures	Michelle	Obama,	Condolezza	Rice,	and	Susan	Rice	are	all	symbols	
of what is possible in the age of Obama and a supposed post-racial society. 
 But the above are clearly erroneous measures of black women’s socioeconomic 
well-being. Branch suggests that skilled and unskilled positions of power and authority
in the workplace have persistently bypassed black women, compared to whites 
and	black	men,	even	into	the	twenty-first	century.	Despite	this	important	point,	she	
actually	devotes	relatively	little	time	to	a	complex	interpretation	of	class.	Her	findings	
may	have	benefitted	from	a	more	clearly	articulated	class	analysis,	especially	as	the	
discussion moved into the mid twentieth century and contemporary period. Black 
women, after all, are not a homogenous population and, similar to other demographic 
groups, include a growing gap between the poor and middle to upper incomes. This 
additional variable would be in keeping with intersectionality theory and could have 
 96
provided a more holistic and complicated understanding of the entirety of black 
women’s labor market experiences. 
 Nonetheless, Branch’s thesis remains a powerful one. The lives of those at the 
upper strata are far and away from the majority of black women in the U.S. Despite 
an emphasis on the declining jobs and wages of black men, the fact is that black 
women’s relative earnings are also eroding. Furthermore, the black/white ratio in 
job loss is larger among women than men.1 Even the growing gap between African 
American	haves	and	have	nots	does	not	reduce	the	significance	of	persistent	intersecting
gender	and	racial	discrimination	and	inequities.	
 What does opportunity and economic progress really mean for black women 
as mothers, sisters, partners, and caretakers? For Branch, and the majority of black 
women, it indicates an occupational structure that maintains and protects the status 
quo	and	offers	little	promise	of	change.
 1. “Employment Gains and Wage Declines: The Erosion of Black Women’s Relative Wages 
Since 1980,” by Becky Pettit and Stephanie Ewert in the latest issue of Demography. 
University of Kansas Jennifer F. Hamer
THE PASSION OF TIGER WOODS: An Anthropologist Reports on Golf, Race, and 
Celebrity Scandal. By Orin Starn. Durham: Duke University Press. 2011.
 Making effective use of online discourse and other electronic arenas to learn 
the truth about Tiger Woods and celebrity in the modern world, Orin Starn gathers 
anthropological data from social media to evaluate race in post-civil rights America. 
Starn offers an entertaining approach to the everyday and mundane societal patterns 
and social perceptions of celebrity. Adroitly recognizing that “community” has ceased 
to be a neatly circumscribed entity, Starn tracks blogs, chat rooms, message boards, 
and	news	sources	like	ESPN.com	to	accurately	hear	the	tenor	of	twenty-first	century	
voices in an age of political correctness. Of particular concern is how scandal in an 
unprecedented era of social media raised a new set of issues about Tiger Woods. 
His unlikely popularity was due to his golf prowess, his unracialized status, and the 
nature of celebrity in modern America.
 However, this is also a book about golf and its place in American society where 
there are over twenty million golfers. Starn also is philosophical in his discussion of 
how the chance involved in golf and the opportunity “for a more genuine outdoor 
experience”	draws	“the	loner”	who	“finds	a	hermit’s	solace	in	[the]	pastime”	(20-21).	
After a brief but solid overview of the history of golf and its connection to “the very 
ideal of American power, prosperity, and luxury,” Starn discusses the history of golf, 
its rise in the United States of America, and the fascination with Tiger Woods (9). He 
outlines Woods’s blueprint to displace racial memory and the immense pressures of 
being a golf prodigy. 
 When Tiger Woods was lured out of college in 1996 with a $40 million dollar 
endorsement contract from Nike, he was already an icon. Indeed, as Starn explains, 
Woods’s entire life has been about juggling the enormous responsibility being a 
winner,	icon,	entrepreneur,	and	corporate	athlete.	Woods	is	the	first	athlete	to	earn	
 97
$1 billion, his wife is blond-haired, he has two dogs and two children, and as Starn 
points out, he and Elin are “the poster couple for a shiny new postracial America” (xi). 
At the ripe young age of twenty-one he won the coveted Augusta National Masters 
Championship, which was immediately followed by racial controversy about what 
would be on the awards dinner menu. Tiger, foretelling the compromise and effort 
to	take	race	off	the	table	that	would	define	his	career,	promptly	settled	the	matter	by	
crafting a race-neutral menu of hamburgers and hotdogs. 
 In his attempt to dissect notions of post-race America, Starn does a good job of 
detailing how Woods successfully navigates his career, at one point paralleling him to 
President Obama, identifying both men as global offspring of mixed marriages; both 
transcendent in traditionally white professions: politics and golf. In fact, Woods, he 
explains, diverges from the “one drop rule” of race to reposition himself as Cabalasian.
And, as Starn points out, Woods pulls it off, until the night after Thanksgiving 
in	2009	when	it	all	came	crashing	down	as	his	Cadillac	Escalade	destroyed	a	fire	
hydrant and out spouted tales of women “trysting with Tiger” (xii). 
 What is so intriguing about The Passion of Tiger Woods is that it is an adroit 
exploration of the pace of news in the internet age. Indeed, when Woods crashed his 
car, news spread faster than the water from the hydrant, and Woods became “fodder 
for countless jokes, blog-posts, chat-room debates . . . generat[ing] over one million 
hits” (xii). Finally, The Passion of Tiger Woods is a wonderful example of the types 
of anthropological studies that are necessary and possible. Despite the obvious pitfalls 
of the anonymity of his subjects, the approach lends itself to useful, fresh, honest 
tracking of true public perception that ensues in the social media world, which cannot 
be ignored. 
Washington State University, Vancouver Thabiti Lewis
READING UP: Middle Class Readers and the Culture of Success in the Early 
Twentieth Century United States. By Amy L. Blair. Philadelphia: Temple University 
Press. 2011.
	 Hamilton	Wright	Mabie	may	be	the	most	influential	twentieth-century	literary	
critic you’ve never heard of. 
 In her thoroughly researched and impressively readable Reading Up: Middle 
Class Readers and the Culture of Success in the Early Twentieth Century United 
States, English professor Amy Blair takes Mabie’s long-forgotten career as an occasion
to	explore	and	define	a	style	of	 reading	so	foundational	as	 to	be	virtually	
invisible. 
 A lifelong advocate of cultivating in oneself a “reading habit,” which Blair describes
as “an easy and automatic rapport with books that makes reading the default 
option for a leisured hour,” Mabie himself believed that “the great service [books] 
render us—the greatest service that can be rendered us—is the enlargement, enrichment,
and unfolding of ourselves” (5). 
 From 1902 to 1912, Mabie wrote a column called “Mr. Mabie Tells What to 
Read” for the Ladies Home Journal. In	keeping	with	that	publication’s	acquisitive	
 98
and	aspirational	ethos,	he	recommended	titles	and	authors	his	audience	would	find	
worthwhile and improving as they strove their way socially and economically upward. 
His lists included support of writers still recognized today as great—Ralph Waldo 
Emerson, Edith Wharton, and Charles Dickens—and authors that have largely been 
lost, like Mabie himself, to the ages—John Fox, Jr., James Lane Allen, and S. Weir 
Mitchell. 
 In doing so, Mabie simultaneously made the case for reading as an act possessing
intrinsic value, but also—perhaps only semi-wittingly—propagated a strategy 
of (mis)reading that Blair terms “reading up.” 
 Using a lucid combination of book history and reception studies, Blair explains 
that “when a reader approaches a text because experts have deemed it ‘the best’ thing 
to read and reads in the interest of self-interest, that reader is ‘reading up’” (3-4), 
adding that if one is reading up, “one is reading the ‘right books,’ dutifully, but not 
necessarily in the ‘right way’” (4). This phenomenon can cause a reader to identify 
with minor characters as opposed to central ones, or to ignore the social, political, 
and	economic	critique	an	author	may	have	intended	in	favor	of	integrating	an	expertrecommended
text with that reader’s own optimistic and upwardly mobile worldview. 
 Over the course of the book’s chapters on William Dean Howells, Henry James, 
Wharton and various American regionalists, Blair argues that both the recommenders
of books as vehicles for self-improvement such as Mabie and the readers who 
followed their advice tended to speak of books less in terms of aesthetics or pleasure 
and more in the language of business or with monetary metaphors. 
 And although Mabie himself seemed embarrassed by his work for the Ladies 
Home Journal,	seeking	to	all	but	erase	it	from	his	CV,	his	influence	lingers	insofar	as	
even—or especially—non-readers have internalized the assumptions of this kind of 
(mis)understanding of the value—“aesthetic, emotional, social, material” (204)—of 
reading. Blair convincingly posits Mabie as a proto-Oprah Winfrey, pointing out how 
Winfrey herself is able to assert the value of reading without ever actually having 
to	defend	that	assertion	chiefly	because	of	the	cultural	heavy	lifting	her	predecessor	
Mabie did roughly a century ago. 
DePaul University Kathleen Rooney
SEEING THROUGH RACE: A Reinterpretation of Civil Rights Photography. By 
Martin A. Berger. Berkley: University of California Press. 2011.
 Martin Berger’s Seeing through Race: A Reinterpretation of Civil Rights Photography
is a well-researched and nuanced analysis of iconic civil rights images 
depicting the struggle of African Americans in Birmingham, Alabama, during the 
sixties.	In	his	groundbreaking	work,	Berger	not	only	focuses	on	the	significance	of	
these visual images in garnering support for the black civil rights struggle, he pushes 
his readers to consider the ways that these documentary photographs of this important 
era reveal as much about whiteness as they do about blackness. In the tradition of 
other important works in critical race theory and critical whiteness studies, Berger 
illuminates “the role that the photographs played in managing whites’ anxieties about 
 99
race,”	but	more	 specifically	“how	white	 journalists	 and	 their	 audiences	 selected,	
framed, and responded to the most famous scenes of the civil rights era” (6). 
 Seeing through Race relies on close readings of the coverage of both the white 
and black press to buttress his argument that the consistent use of certain photographs 
was part of a complex assertion of an acceptable “menu of narratives that performed 
reassuring symbolic work” (6). According to Berger, such narratives emphasizing 
the brutality of powerful whites against helpless blacks not only worked to garner 
support	for	the	civil	rights	struggle,	they	served	to	reaffirm	white	power	and	privilege.
Berger contrasts the consistent choice of images depicting peaceful, middle-
class protestors and helpless children being attacked with hoses and vicious dogs 
with	photographs	of	clear	instances	of	black	resistance	and	agency.	In	the	first	few	
chapters of the book, he provides convincing analyses of white shame, the complex 
practice of whites distancing themselves from blacks, as well as the white interests 
served by these classic depictions of the civil rights struggle. 
 Berger provides a convincing analysis of the images that were consistently chosen 
by the press during the period of his study. However, his discussion of “the lost images
of civil rights” and “visual absences” in the documentary record provides some 
of the most convincing evidence for his thesis (113). Most notably his analysis of the 
limited coverage of Emmett Till’s murder by the white media reveals the subtle and 
“complex symbolic work that black children performed in the white imagination” 
(126). In addition, Berger’s discussion of the cases of Ethel Witherspoon and Annie 
Lee Cooper reminds readers of the importance of intersectional analyses of the experiences
of	African	American	women.	More	specifically,	his	discussion	highlights	
how stereotypical ideas about black womanhood functioned as part of dominant civil 
rights narratives and depictions that are the foundation of his study. 
 Seeing through Race: A Reinterpretation of Civil Rights Photography is a 
compelling work that contributes to the rich scholarship on the African American 
experience in the United States. It also provides an important example of the ways 
that a critical engagement with the meaning and construction of whiteness contributes 
to	the	projects	of	social	justice	equality.
Grinnell College  Lakesia D. Johnson
STRICTLY KOSHER READING: Popular Literature and the Condition of Contemporary
Orthodoxy. By Yoel Finkelman. Boston: American Studies Press. 2011.
 In his book, Yoel Finkelman critically investigates a community that he simultaneously
inhabits	and	questions.	A	modern	Orthodox	Jew	himself,	he	discovers	an	
often hypocritical grooming of the literature, its publishers and hierarchy within the 
Ultra Orthodox Haredi community. In the preface, he presents a revealing illustration
of a Haredi world’s eye view entitled The Lost Treasure of Tikkun HaMiddos 
Island.	One	side	of	the	picture	is	clearly	the	“bad	world”	filled	with	corruption,	lost	
souls,	and	addiction	and	the	other	is	filled	with	synagogues,	happy	Jewish	children,	
and religious celebrations. The caption states: “Many middos (character traits) are 
required	as	we	grow	up.	We	must	be	careful	to	choose	a	positive	Torah	environment,	
 100
which will enhance the development of good middos.” The concept of creating a 
self-contained	pure	environment,	while	being	blind	to	the	infiltration	of	popular	and	
modern or post modern culture, is the nexus of this research. 
 The analysis utilizes varied disciplines of social and intellectual history and 
cultural and media studies. First, the research is connected to its social and historical 
context via text and collective narrative and then unravels the obvious, yet disguised 
outside	influences	of	commercial	and	technological	advances.	By	creating	a	critical	
research combining these stages of understanding, Finkelman reveals a world desperate
to remain untouched by the outside world, claiming to have an uncomplicated 
and pure life while at the same time re-creating popular literature for a Haredi understanding.
This	re-writing	takes	both	scientific	and	psychological	knowledge	and	
“stretches the truth” in order to provide a more Torah-centered answer for its public. 
The	texts	are	re-told	but	are	subtextually	influenced	by	popular	culture	and	literature.	
This subtext gives added value to the commercial value of the written word. The text 
is given a stamp of kashrut (kosher laws) by the author’s rabbinic status or place in 
Haredi expertise and practice. These texts are not popular culture, however they are 
also not-NOT popular culture. 
 One critical example is a discussion of parenting guides in the Haredi community. 
One author claims his parenting guide is as ancient and effective as the Torah. While 
legitimizing his book and theories with the backing and authenticity of the Torah, 
he himself disputes the support of corporal punishment which the texts of the Torah 
command. His parenting guide reads more like a secular guide written for a popular 
American parenting community. Another author includes citations of pop-psychology 
beside sources from the Torah. Finkelman reveals these idiosyncratic texts that assert 
both	scientific	and	academic	credentials	without	legitimate	proof.	He	paints	a	world	
that is driven by a blind, simple faith, however, is intentionally “koshered” to portray 
a naïve and utopian world view. Education and the progress of the Haredi community 
becomes	stifled	and	stuck	in	a	narrative	of	the	past,	while	mutually	influenced	by	
commercial religious gain. Filled with both subtle and blatant ironies, Finkelman 
brings the discussion of Jewish culture and identities into postmodern rhetoric. 
 Finkelman stands with only a handful of scholars such as Jeremy Stolow (author
of Orthodox by Design: Judaism, Print Politics, and the Artscroll Revolution, 
2010) who have taken a risk to reveal and criticize their own Jewish community. 
This scholarship calls for more critical analysis and postmodern identity theory in 
Jewish Studies internationally.
Hebrew Union College, Jerusalem, Israel Tamar H. Havilio
THOSE GIRLS: Single Women in Sixties and Seventies Popular Culture. By Katherine
J. Lehman. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. 2011.
 Those Girls	by	Katherine	L.	Lehman	targets	significant	social	and	cultural	issues,
i.e., representation of single women in the popular culture of the sixties and 
seventies. The concept of the single girl appeared in 1960s as a trendy alternative to 
 101
“spinster”	and	became	soon	a	“pivotal	figure	in	post	war	popular	culture.”	The	author	
examines the gradual shift in the grammar of representation (to rephrase a concept 
by St. Hall) of American female singles. The volume reveals how female characters 
are gradually transgressing both moral codes and constraints of the genre, i.e., they 
appear initially as largely comic characters whose “extraordinary incompetence 
exceeded only by their monumental stupidity” (119); later occupy central roles in 
sitcoms, and are elevated to leading dramatic roles only in the mid-1970s. 
	 As	entertainment	industries	aimed	at	producing	narratives	that	are	both	profitable
and politically relevant, pop culture became an arena where feminist ideas are 
contested. By negotiating public tensions and producing an acceptable picture of the 
“single girl,” American media often sent contradictory messages, or “sexual puzzles,” 
to their audiences. Still, pop culture was giving “lip service to feminism, countering 
negative perceptions of the movement circulating in society” (207). By incorporating
glamour and strength, sexual appeal and independence, it symbolically resolved 
the contradictions and diffused the excesses of political feminism. It contributed to 
the development of “lifestyle feminism,” where feminist ideals are dissociated from 
political agendas and presented as personal and individualized choices. 
 Since the 1960s and 1970s, the “single girl” was portrayed as a threat to social
and sexual order. The images of singles were presented as an alternative to 
domesticity—alluring, exotic, promising, but also risky, unstable, and unsafe. The 
“single girl” was a sensationalized subject, varying from independent hero-seeking 
self-actualization to aggressive, pitiable neurotic. Although media was “harnessing 
feminism for commercial ends” (117), glorifying single lives as commercially successful
projects and as the road to upward social mobility, the sensationalized accounts 
contained possibilities both of self-discovery and self-destruction, i.e., desperate 
need	for	both	sexual	and	emotional	fulfillment,	radical	experience	of	displacement,	
alienation, non-belonging, and emotional (sometimes also physical) death. 
	 The	author	is	examining	“fictional	women	from	the	silver	screen”	and	omitting	
other	key	figures	of	pop	culture,	such	as	celebrities,	actresses,	singers,	TV	and	radio	
show	hosts,	models,	etc.,	 so	 the	question	“what	constitutes	pop	culture”	 remains	
unanswered.	The	volume	 is	 descriptive,	 containing	 long	passages	of	film	 scenes	
and	lots	of	trivia,	and	the	author	is	quite	reserved	in	making	her	own	statements	or	
conclusions.	The	author	is	omitting	the	fact	that	fictional	female	characters	from	the	
1960s and 1970s represent not only the experience of second wave feminism, but the 
general experience of modernity. It includes the experience of personal autonomy, 
displacement and non-belonging, absence of communal ties, anomy, individualisation,
where self-identity emancipated from the bonds of traditions becomes an act of 
self-discovery.	“I	don’t	know	who	I	am,	or	what	I	want.	I	only	know	I	have	to	find	it	
out”	(109)—the	quote	illuminates	well	A.	Giddens’	concept	of	reflexive	modernity.
 The book is written in candid, easy style, and it is a good read for anyone interested
in media, pop culture, feminism, and psychoanalysis, although this aspect is not 
accentuated. It presents rich empirical accounts and sheds new light on contemporary 
popular culture. In this light, the phenomenally successful Sex and the City merely 
 102
replicates the old grammar of representation, exploits the old plot where single life 
is the site of deadly despair and glamorous success.
Vytautas	Magnus	University,	Lithuania		 Rasa	Baločkaitė
THE WHITE NEGRESS: Literature, Minstrelsy, and the Black-Jewish Imaginary. 
By Lori Harrison-Kahan. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. 2011.
 Lori Kahan-Harrison’s The White Negress—deserving winner of the American 
Studies	Association’s	2010	Gloria	E.	Anzaldúa	Award—acts	as	a	significant	challenge	
to existing scholarship concerning whiteness, cross-racial performances, and blackJewish
encounters (3). Focusing her research on Jewish and black women’s racial 
appropriations in literature and minstrelsy, Harrison-Kahan demonstrates that gender 
and sexuality complicate the “masculinist paradigms” that have long circumscribed 
scholarly explorations of blackface minstrelsy and “black-Jewish relations” (6). 
 In The White Negress, Harrison-Kahan analyzes the representation of a fundamentally
ambivalent	female	figure	appearing	in	texts	authored	by	Jewish	and	black	
artists during the interwar period. Her four substantive chapters act as case studies, 
exploring the portrayal of this recurrent character in Sophie Tucker’s stage performances
and autobiography Some of These Days (1945), Edna Ferber’s Show Boat 
(1926), Fannie Hurst’s Imitation of Life (1933), and Zora Neale Hurston’s Moses, 
Man of the Mountain	(1939).	Harrison-Kahan	names	this	figure	“the	white	negress”	
after famed actress Sarah Bernhardt’s self-description in her memoir My Double Life 
(1907). Associated simultaneously with Jewishness, blackness, and whiteness as 
well as “unconventional femininity,” Bernhardt—known for her performance of the 
belle juive, or “beautiful Jewess”—cultivated a mysterious star persona that traded 
on her racial ambiguity and gender nonconformity (22). Harrison-Kahan argues that, 
like Bernhardt, the white negresses of Tucker, Ferber, Hurst, and Hurston’s texts 
are racially ambiguous—Jewish, mixed-race, “racially indeterminate or ethnically 
unidentified”—New	Women,	“whose	crossing	of	racial	lines	becomes	intertwined	
with	her	defiance	of	gender	and	domestic	norms”	(2).	Her	central	argument	is	that	
the white negress complicates the black-white racial binary. 
	 By	analyzing	these	artists’	representations	of	the	sexually	and	financially	independent
white negress in minstrelsy and cross-racial narratives, Harrison-Kahan 
tests longstanding assumptions concerning the motivations behind male Jewish 
performers’ decisions to “cork up.” On the one hand, Irving Howe, in World of Our 
Fathers (1976), proposes that American Jewish performers donned blackface as an 
expression of their Jewishness, an identity conveyed partly through empathy and 
solidarity with African Americans and their freedom struggle. On the other, Michael 
Rogin,	 in	his	influential	Blackface, White Noise (1996), argues that through their 
blackface routines, Jewish entertainers exploited African Americans, performing racism
in an effort to eschew Jewishness and claim whiteness. Yet, as Harrison-Kahan 
maintains, scholars have largely overlooked the ways that gender informs Jewish 
artists’	relationships	to	blackface	performance.	Her	findings	suggest	that	“women	
performers appear to experience a deeper resistance to assuming blackface” (6). Their 
 103
resistance, she continues, is partly the result of antiracist impulses, but largely their 
concern that the masculinizing and desexualizing effects of “blacking up” precluded 
them from achieving ideal white femininity. Ultimately, Harrison-Kahan contends 
that Howe and Rogin’s opposing paradigms for understanding Jewish blackface 
performance—that Jews either	identified	empathetically	with	African	Americans	in	
order to trouble ethno-racial categories or	disidentified	with	them	in	a	bid	for	whiteness—obscure
“the possibility that whiteness can be both produced and destabilized 
through cross-racial performances and encounters” (4, 179). 
 Likewise, Harrison-Kahan’s The White Negress challenges prevailing blackJewish
relations scholarship, which has largely privileged moments of solidarity 
and enmity between male-dominated political organizations or literary conversations 
between prominent black and Jewish male authors at mid-century. By exploring 
intercultural	identifications	and	tensions	between	Jewish	and	black	women	during	
the interwar period, Harrison-Kahan contests the implicit assumption that men and 
women experience interracial relationships in similar ways and sheds light on an 
understudied era of black-Jewish relations. 
 Although, by her own admission, Harrison-Kahan’s The White Negress is not “a 
comprehensive survey of black-Jewish relations among women” or Jewish women 
and blackface performance, her study is perhaps most noteworthy for its assertion 
that	future	work	in	these	fields	must	take	women,	gender,	and	sexuality	seriously	(3).	
Skidmore College Megan E. Williams
ALOHA AMERICA: Hula Circuits through the U.S. Empire. By Adria L. Imada. 
Durham: Duke University Press. 2012. 
 Aloha America maps the circuits through which relationships between the 
United States and Hawai’i are intimately imagined, and the ways in which the deeply 
gendered and racialized hula practices and performers function as the conduit, if 
transnationally, through which these circuits circulate. “Imagined intimacy” is indeed
a concept that the book introduces to understand “a potent fantasy that enabled 
Americans	to	possess	their	island	colony	physically	and	figuratively”	(11),	a	process	
that is embodied in these live hula circuits. 
 Not another book that simply frames Hawaiians as yet again “victims” of imperial
and global economy, Aloha America paints a nuanced picture of hula performers 
as “actors operating within U.S. colonizing processes” (25). It takes us through a 
journey that explores the late nineteenth-century hula circuit in Honolulu, the dancers’
experiences of navigating colonial spaces in the United States and Europe, the 
Hawaiian men’s experiences as the hula brokers, and the ways in which imagined 
intimacy is maintained through the military photography of these hula shows. 
	 The	brilliance	of	this	book	does	not	stop	there,	however.	I	find	its	methodology	
most intellectually energizing and inspiring. Imada traverses between past and present,
working	in	the	“interstices	of	archive	and	field,	reconstituting	and	creating	new	
archives with insights gained from hula performance and ethnographic research in 
hula communities” (21). Interviewing surviving dancers and their families, peering 
 104
through their photographs and personal memorabilia, carefully and critically reading
hula	performances	and	films,	Aloha America produces an archive of the present, 
creating	a	“living	repertoire	of	hula”	that	enlivens	the	methodological	field	of	inquiry,	
presenting it as its own contribution (22). In doing so it escapes the binary trap of 
representing hula and the performers as either victims or agencies in the global 
circulation of hula. Moreover, by employing a strategy of “discrepant readings” in 
critically	examining	“official	and	unofficial	archives	and	performance;	that	is,	finding	
‘hidden transcripts’ within imperial scripts, scenarios, and tableaux” by focusing on 
“fragments and the ephemeral” such as women’s desires, the book indeed successfully
produces an epistemic space that is both intimate and critical (23). 
University of Hawai’i at Manoa  L. Ayu Saraswati
AMERICA’S FILM LEGACY, 2009–2010: A Viewer’s Guide to the 50 Landmark 
Movies Added to the National Film Registry in 2009–2010. By Daniel Eagan. New 
York: Continuum. 2012.
FATALISM IN AMERICAN FILM NOIR: Some Cinematic Philosophy. By Robert 
B. Pippin. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press. 2012. 
AMERICAN SHOWMAN: Samuel “Roxy” Rothafel and the Birth of the Entertainment
Industry. By Ross Melnick. New York: Columbia University Press. 2012.
	 Eagan	and	Pippin	have	written	monographs	whose	brevity	belies	their	significance.
Eagan	offers	a	critical	survey	of	the	fifty	films	added	to	the	Registry,	placing	
each in context, whether it is a documentary like Grey Gardens,	an	experimental	film	
like The Lead Shoes, a studio product like Pillow Talk, or an adaptation like A Tree 
Grows in Brooklyn. He is especially good on All the President’s Men (1976), noting 
that it was a gamble, since the Watergate hearings had been televised and Nixon had 
already resigned. Moreover, the stars, Robert Redford and Dustin Hoffman, had 
lost some of their luster. Hoffman’s last memorable performance was in Little Big 
Man (1970), and The Great Gatsby (1972) with Redford in the title role was coolly 
received. The director, Alan J. Pakula was a relative newcomer, having only directed 
four	films,	although	two	of	them,	Klute and The Parallax View, were well reviewed. 
Still, he was not bankable.
	 Pakula	did	not	have	an	easy	time.	Choices	had	to	be	made,	and	key	figures	had	
to be omitted, such as Katherine Graham, whom Geraldine Page was scheduled to 
play, until the editor of the Washington Post refused to have her portrayed at all. Yet 
despite	the	obstacles,	the	film	turned	out	to	be	a	triumph	for	everyone	involved.
	 Historians	would	find	much	of	value	in	America’s Film Legacy. Apart from All 
the President’s Men,	there	are	essays	on	such	films	as	the	documentary	Let There 
Be Light, Story of G.I. Joe, Malcolm X, and The Revenge of Pancho Villa (1936), 
into which bits from the presumably lost Life of Pancho Villa (1914) and the serial 
Liberty (1916) have been incorporated, resulting in a balanced view of Villa as both 
hero and villain. Although readers often ignore introductions, Eagan’s is relevant. 
It	is	a	persuasive	argument	for	film	preservation,	emphasizing	the	fragile	nature	of	
celluloid,	which	can	catch	fire,	decompose,	or	rot	from	mold	and	mildew.	Some	films	
 105
are irrevocably lost, but the Registry is committed to acknowledging the best of the 
survivors. 
 Fatalism in American Film Noir does not purport to be a critical study of the 
genre,	but	rather	close	readings	of	three	films	(although	the	author	refers	to	many	
more): Out of the Past (1947), The Lady from Shanghai (1948), and Scarlet Street 
(1945), placed within the context of agency vs. fate, self-knowledge vs. ignorance, 
firm	convictions	vs.	lingering	doubts,	and	the	intentional	vs.	the	accidental.	In	The 
Lady from Shanghai, Michael O’Hara (Orson Welles) rescues Elsa Bannister (Rita 
Hayworth) from what looks like an intended gang rape (or was it staged?) and gets 
suckered	 into	 becoming	first	mate	 on	 her	 husband’s	 yacht,	 unaware	 that	 he	 has	
been recruited to be the fall guy in a murder plot that veers out of control. Elsa and 
Grisby, her husband’s law associate, plan to murder her husband, except that Elsa 
kills Grisby, and she and her husband kill each other in a glass-shattering shootout. 
Narrative	logic	is	suspended,	not	disbelief.	But	the	film,	apart	from	being	visually	
fascinating, is the most existential of noirs. As Elsa lies dying, she says: “You can 
fight,	but	what	good	is	it?	You	can’t	win,”	to	which	Michael	replies,	“We	can’t	lose	
either.	Only	if	we	quit.”	Samuel	Beckett	would	have	agreed.	The Unnamable ends 
on a note of resignation without hope but stopping short of despair: “You must go 
on. I can’t go on. I’ll go on.” 
 The existential hero goes on, like Jeff (Robert Mitchum) in Out of the Past, so 
caught	up	in	a	world	out	of	control	that	he	ignores	the	danger	signals	flashed	by	the	
femme fatale (Jane Greer) that will eventually cost him his life. In Scarlet Street, 
an aspiring painter (Edward G. Robinson) comes to the aid of a hooker (Joan Bennett)—the
initial stage of his descent into the abyss of noir, in which everyone is lost 
in the stars through some astral conspiracy. 
 Fatalism in American Film Noir originated as a series of lectures, making it 
eminently readable, even when Pippin moves from lecture to lectern, adopting an 
academic tone that is still refreshingly clear, given the density of the subject matter. 
What	Pippin	has	done,	as	 the	subtitle	suggests,	 is	 to	give	film	noir	philosophical	
validity,	since	at	the	heart	of	the	genre	is	a	series	of	epistemological	questions:	What	
do we know? How do we know it? And most important, why do we ignore it if we 
know it? 
 American Showman is not a monograph but an impeccably researched and definitive
study	of	Samuel	“Roxy”	Rothafel,	who	gave	his	nickname	to	a	theater	long	
since demolished and who made “The Living Nativity” and “Parade of the Wooden 
Soldiers” staples of the Radio City Music Hall Christmas Spectacular, still a holiday 
perennial. Melnick traces Roxy’s odyssey from a logging community in Minnesota 
to Broadway—an odyssey that, unlike a movie, where time is compressed in a montage
of billowing calendar pages, was not linear. There were detours and stopovers. 
Roxy was a street smart kid and budding entrepreneur, who offered neighborhood 
tours for a penny and who enlisted in the Marines at nineteen, a fact that he used to 
advantage when he became an exhibitor and added patriotic music to World War I 
newsreels. Managing movie theaters were not a goal until he ended up in Carbondale, 
a coal town in northeastern Pennsylvania, and took part in a minstrel show. The great 
 106
moviemakers entered the business through a combination of chance, providence, and 
determination.	Carl	Laemmle,	the	founder	of	the	film	company	that	became	Universal,	
passed by a Chicago nickelodeon and sensed a rendezvous with destiny. Roxy was 
more pragmatic. An opportunity to create a combination vaudeville house/skating 
rink,	which	also	included	filmed	entertainment,	led	him	to	think	exclusively	in	terms	
of	a	combination	of	film	and	live	entertainment,	which	became	the	distinctive	feature	
of the theaters that he managed in New York. 
 Roxy’s goal was to become a “high class” exhibitor, with theaters that featured
attractive but not glamorous cashiers and courteous ushers, and a mezzanine 
promenade when patrons could socialize during intermissions. Roxy was a media 
convergence pioneer, even though the phrase had not yet been coined. When radio 
became a mass medium, he arranged for a live broadcast from New York’s Capitol 
Theater in 1922. He did not chose a standard like Beethoven’s Fifth on that historic 
evening, but rather Richard Strauss’s symphonic poem, Ein Heldenleben (“A Hero’s 
Life”),	 perhaps	because	 he	 thought	 of	 his	 own	 life	 in	 equally	 heroic	 terms.	The	
self-righteous objected to his signature sign off (“Goodnight. Pleasant Dreams, and 
God Bless You”), claiming it was a benediction delivered by a Jew. But Roxy was 
undaunted. 
 There was a period when he managed some of Broadway’s biggest theater: the 
Strand, Rialto, and Capitol, and the one that bore his name, the Roxy, on 50th Street 
between Seventh and Sixth Avenue, which became the showcase for Twentieth 
Century-Fox movies. The Roxy was tastefully opulent, not Art Deco like Radio City 
Music Hall a few blocks East, but the kind of movie palace that made patrons feel 
better about themselves when they entered it. 
 Roxy’s next move was to Radio City Music Hall, where he was general manager 
as well as producer, publicist, and talent scout. His unswerving commitment to high 
production values drove up the budget, resulting in a reduction of salary, a diminution 
of authority, and his eventual departure. A diet of frankfurters and sandwiches led 
to	his	death	at	fifty-three	in	1936.	Yet	Roxy	was,	as	Melnick	described	him,	a	media	
Zelig, to whom nothing was alien, as long as it meant entertainment, whether it was 
radio,	film,	orchestral	music,	ballet,	or	opera.	He	respected	them	all.
 Lovers of the musical Guys and Dolls will	 think	differently	 about	 the	first	
verse of the title song after reading American Showman: “What’s playing at the 
Roxy?” Now nothing’s playing at the Roxy. When it was demolished in 1960, Gloria 
Swanson, whose Love of Sunya was the featured attraction at the 1927 opening, was 
photographed	standing	defiantly	amid	the	ruins.	In	its	day,	the	Roxy	was	known	as	
the “cathedral of the motion picture.” It was also the cathedral of Samuel “Roxy” 
Rothafel (1882–1936).
Fairleigh Dickinson University, Teaneck Campus  Bernard F. Dick
 107
 THE ANTHROPOLOGICAL STUDY OF CLASS AND CONSCIOUSNESS. By 
E. Paul Durrenberger. Boulder: University Press of Colorado. 2012.
	 There	has	never	been	a	moment	in	history	when	class	inequality	has	been	so	
extreme and conspicuous. Yet, paradoxically, class as a category and frame for 
understanding the world seems to have lost its luster. Class power structures life in 
absolutely fundamental ways, yet public discourse and even most academic debate 
is remarkably resistant to serious discussion of class as a concept and analytical tool.
 The various contributors to The Anthropological Study of Class and Consciousness
take this contradiction head on by exploring the relationships between how 
people experience their worlds, how they understand those worlds, and how those 
experiences and understandings are connected to people’s class locations within the 
broader capitalist system. The collection, then, is less a theoretical treatise on class 
and more an explication of how class works. 
 This is part of what makes the book so timely. At a moment when many have 
come	to	assume	that	people,	jobs,	and	basic	services	are	disposable	and	defined	solely	
in terms of the market, it is useful to understand both how neoliberal market forces 
work and how different groups of people come to understand them in certain ways 
and not others. 
 In the introduction, Paul Durrenberger looks at class not only in terms of how 
it structures the world, but why it remains so “invisible” within American public 
life.	He	also	argues	that	ethnography,	as	a	method	that	situates	detailed	first-hand	
observation within larger systems of power, is a very useful tool for the absolutely 
essential task of making class more visible.
	 The	rest	of	the	contributors	take	these	questions	on	within	the	context	of	case	
studies	that	move	across	time	and	space,	with	the	first	three	(more	historical)	chapters	
looking at the relationship between class and culture in pre-historic Mongolia, medieval
Iceland, and southwest China over a several hundred year period. The remaining 
eight chapters are decidedly more contemporary and focus on the Americas. We move 
from discussions of the “Antiglobal” South and the rural U.S. to the U.S.-Mexican 
border, the auto industry, and even the beauty salon.
 What the reader is ultimately left with is a collection that helps us understand 
connections—connections between how people experience the world, how they 
understand it, and how and why those experiences and understandings differ so 
significantly	from	one	another.	Like	all	quality	anthropology,	and	perhaps	all	good	
scholarship, part of this process involves interrogating capitalist ideology in order to 
understand the reality behind the mask. The authors do this well in part by listening 
closely to what real people have to say.
 As the title suggests, The Anthropological Study of Class and Consciousness 
is very much grounded within the discipline of anthropology. Yet, this is a readable 
book,	with	more	than	half	of	the	case	studies	focused	on	the	Americas.	Consequently,	
it	can	be	read	with	great	benefit	by	scholars	of	American	Studies	or	anyone	interested	
in how the world works and is understood. 
University	of	New	Orleans	 Steve	Striffler
 108
AN ARMY OF LIONS: The Civil Rights Struggle before the NAACP. By Shawn 
Leigh Alexander. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 2012.
 An Army of Lions by University of Kansas historian Shawn Leigh Alexander is 
a highly welcomed contribution to the historiography of American civil rights. This 
book concentrates on African American civil rights organizations during the immediate
post-Reconstruction period to the founding of the Niagara Movement focusing 
on organizations such as the Afro-American League and the Afro-American Council. 
Alexander also highlights key personalities such as T. Thomas Fortune. Alexander 
argues that the Afro-American League, in particular, provided the ideological platform 
for the more prominent NAACP. Even after the Afro-American League dissolved, 
local “leagues” and the Afro-American Council continued to operate from the same 
ideology. Such an argument helps scholars to understand better the importance of 
this period known as the “nadir” in terms of African American political organizing 
and	its	influence	on	the	modern	civil	rights	movement.
 One large assertion Alexander challenges is that the Niagara Movement was 
the legitimate progenitor of the NAACP. Alexander’s evidence to counter this argument
rests on the general context of the resurgence of white Southern terrorism in 
the immediate post-Reconstruction South as Conservatives attempted and succeeded 
to disenfranchise African Americans. Alexander points out that African American 
leadership saw the clear need to organize for the protection of their civil rights as 
early as the 1880s through calls by African American journalists such as T. Thomas 
Fortune and Ida B. Wells. In 1889, leaders formed the Afro-American League. 
 According to Alexander, historians have concluded that the Afro-American 
League failed in its objectives owing to its brief tenure of national activity. Countering
this, Alexander contends that viewing the activity of the League’s support on 
all levels, local and national, renders the League successful in its attempt to protest 
against American racism. This particular argument is noteworthy in comprehending
his larger argument. Though the League ceased to exist in 1894, supporters 
carried the work into the early twentieth century. In the near future, supporters of 
the League’s cause would organize in cities and states to carry on the ideals of the 
League. Eventually, supporters would organize yet another national organization in 
1898, the Afro-American Council, which Alexander states “mirrored” the League 
in everything but its name (83). 
	 Alexander’s	work	fills	a	gap	in	African	American	historiography	that	has	so	often	
overlooked the steady political activity of African American leaders during the “nadir.”
By combing through organizational records and African American newspapers, 
Alexander presents a well-written, engaging, and full-bodied text. This book will 
enrich	future	scholarship	of	this	period	as	it	opens	avenues	to	study	key	figures	like	
Bishop Alexander Walters and Rev. Walter Brooks. This work will also improve the 
teaching of African American history as it offers such a rich and detailed portrait of 
the work of African American men and women to overcome white supremacy that 
laid the foundations for the NAACP and leaders like W. E. B. Du Bois. 
Calvin College Eric Michael Washington
 109
ARRESTED JUSTICE: Black Women, Violence, and America’s Prison Nation. By 
Beth E. Richie. New York: New York University Press. 2012.
 Ms. B., Tanya, and the New Jersey 4 (Vernice Brown, Terrain Dandridge, 
Renata Hill, Patreese Johnson). Tamika Huston, Kelley Williams-Bolar, Tiawanda 
Moore, and Kemba Smith. Their tragic sufferings bear witness to “arrested justice” 
by making visible the obscene reality of what Beth E. Richie calls “the male violence 
matrix”—the physical, sexual, and emotional assaults encountered by black women 
at the intimate, community, and state levels (127). A criminology, law, and justice 
scholar and anti-violence advocate, Richie documents not only their stories—the 
sort often obliterated or minimized—but also the unjust treatment, legislation, and 
increasingly decontextualized anti-violence struggles and analyses that have driven 
advocacy and reform. 
 The black women whose names appear above experienced a range of violence—
from	physical	assaults	at	the	hands	of	police	officers	and	a	homophobic	stranger,	
intimidation and murder by male partners, and condemnation and systemic exclusion. 
Their stories are not theirs alone. They reveal a process of criminalization—whether 
because of their race and gender, class and sexuality, audacity to walk in “off-limits” 
public spaces, attempt to secure a better education for children, or decision to engage 
in community activism—that violates them yet again. Such denigration, alongside 
identity	and	the	political	milieu,	influences	the	responses	of	the	media,	the	state,	and	
activist communities.
 In the chapter “How We Won the Mainstream but Lost the Movement,” Richie 
persuasively charts how movement advocates, over time, excluded entire swaths of 
women and by extension forms of violence in their search for mainstream legitimacy 
and resources in the conservative political eras of the 1980s and 1990s—a time rife 
with attacks on the social safety net for marginalized groups. To be sure, shelters, rape 
crisis centers, and domestic violence laws were established with purposeful effect, 
but	Richie	asks	us	to	question:	for	whom?	And	that	begs	the	follow-up	questions:	
who	was	left	out	and	why?	Richie	answers	her	questions	in	part	by	exposing	how	
the tendency to focus on “neutral” gender, intimate partner violence, and attendant 
remedies often disparately impact, even bypass, black communities at the same 
time that they fail to capture the types of violence experienced by black women 
in a “prison nation,” which “depends on the ability of leaders to create fear . . . to 
identify scapegoats . . . and to reclassify people as enemies of a stable society” (3). 
As Richie writes, this “loss of focus . . . seriously compromised the transgressive 
and	transformative	potential	of	the	anti-violence	movement’s	radical	social	critique	
of power, various patriarchies, economic exploitation, and heterosexism” (91).
 This book provokes outrage and affords insights, and it does this by centering 
black women, both through testimonies and black feminist frameworks that unmask, 
as well as develop strategies and praxis, for addressing the matrix of male violence. 
In doing so, Arrested Justice also presents a needed counterweight to male-focused 
studies and activist agendas on the carceral state, provides a stark reminder of the 
 110
interlocking nature of oppression, and demands that we be formidably attuned to the 
explanations, rationalizations, and contexts in which social justice is forged. 
Case Western Reserve University Rhonda Y. Williams
THE BEAUTIFUL MUSIC ALL AROUND US: Field Recordings and the American 
Experience. By Stephen Wade. Urbana, Chicago: University of Illinois Press. 2012.
 The text is a collection of twelve case studies that explore how the vernacular 
creativity of performers and instrumentalists functions on traditional forms of music. 
Wade selected thirteen representative tracks from his 1997, thirty-track CD. Those 
recordings are from the legendary Library of Congress Archive of Folk Culture 
(AFC) collection, 1933–1946. Each of the thirteen tracks is a performance by one of 
the subjects, two by Ora Dell Graham. In their excitement, the reader might proceed 
directly to the case studies to get up-close to the lives of the subjects. This would be a 
mistake. Wade makes excellent use of the preface and introduction to give readers a 
panoramic view of this work that will heighten their appreciation for the text. There, 
we get a glimpse into the author’s early interactions with vernacular performers 
and gain an understanding of his commitment to folk music. For the “reservoirs of 
culture thrive not only in institutionally sanctioned preserves such as museums and 
concert halls, but also in the streets and marketplaces” (x). Wade does not attempt to 
move	vernacular	music	into	the	ivory	tower,	but	to	position	the	“peasant	fiddler”	as	
equally	worthy	of	an	acknowledged	place	in	the	human	experience	“as	the	symphony	
violinist” (25). 
 Wade conducted in-person and telephone interviews; corresponded via personal 
notes and emails; and consulted numerous books, journal and newspaper articles, and 
AFC	files	to	produce	the	case	studies.	The	rigor	of	Wade’s	scholarship	is	matched	by	
the book’s literary allure. His writing is fresh and full of imagery, which contributes 
to this work being a multimedia experience between two covers. Reading cases could 
be laborious. But, across the twelve case studies, Wade skillfully holds the reader’s 
interest in what interviewees said or what the researcher read about the subjects. In 
addition to the music CD that comes with the book, Wade gathered many neverbefore-published
images of his subjects and their families and friends (199, 242). He 
included sheet music for some songs and lyrics for others. The opportunity to engage 
with the material through several forms of media heightens this work’s intellectual 
appeal. Wade brings his experience as a researcher, educator, essayist, musician, and 
composer to bear on this work in an informative and thrilling manner. 
	 This	work	builds	on	the	research	and	fieldwork	of	folklorists	including	John	and	
Alan Lomax, Benjamin Botkin, and Archie Green. Wade helps the reader by recalling
their work and contributions to the understanding and appreciation of vernacular 
music. He moves beyond matters of textural and melodic variations that preoccupied 
scholarly attention of the early 1930s. Rather, he opens up the lives of the performers 
and places their lived experience alongside their AFC recording. The result is a set 
of rich biographies that traces iterations of a song along its trajectory to present day 
manifestations of the piece. “The Beautiful Music All Around Us” brings together 
 111
a	fuller	profile	of	twelve	performers	from	the	past	and	underscores	the	relevance	of	
AFC	field	recordings	to	performers	and	audiences	today.	
Independent Scholar, Kansas City, Missouri Z. Hall
BLACK STAR, CRESCENT MOON: The Muslim International and Black Freedom 
beyond America. By Sohail Daulatzai. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
2012. 
 Black Star, Crescent Moon offers a provocative interrogation of the interlocking
processes that have entangled and conjoined African American and Muslim 
communities	in	the	U.S.	from	the	1960s	to	the	1990s	through	literature,	film,	sports,	
Hip-Hop culture, and the prison industrial complex. In this transdisciplinary work 
containing	five	 distinctly	 themed	 chapters,	 an	 introduction	 and	 epilogue,	Sohail	
Daulatzai engages the meaning of Muslim identity and traces the political reach of 
Islam’s diaspora throughout the U.S. and beyond, forming what he calls the Muslim 
International.	As	he	argues,	the	presence	of	Muslims	and	their	perception	as	quintessentially
both non- and anti-American at key points in U.S. political history intersects 
with the racialization and criminalization of African Americans, resulting in mutually 
reinforcing discourses and practices of marginalization. 
	 Popular	culture,	especially	in	the	forms	of	film	and	Hip-Hop,	is	one	of	the	central	
sites	of	contestation	defining	Muslim	identities.	While	the	U.S.	government,	influential
pundits, and conservative think tanks have conspired to stigmatize Muslims as 
perpetual suspects of terrorist activity, argues Daulatzai, through Hip-Hop culture and 
the resurgent interest in Malcolm X, African Americans and Muslims have formed a 
counter-public through an embrace of Islamic cosmology and tradition woven into 
song and verse. 
	 The	author	offers	original,	critical	readings	of	novels,	films,	music,	and	shifting
political geographies since the Cold War in revealing the machinery that has 
relegated black and Muslim identities to the margins while simultaneously claiming 
multicultural inclusiveness. Only by appealing for inclusion under the cloak of what 
Daulatzai calls “Imperial Multiculturalism,” can these groups claim citizenship. 
 According to Daulatzai, the War on Drugs and War on Terror have locked African 
Americans and Muslims in a politics of non-inclusiveness. The New Right’s post-Cold 
War logic has marshaled the exclusionary politics employed during the Cold War. In 
this instance, anti-Muslim rhetoric has replaced anticommunist hysteria. Daulatzai 
argues persuasively that the sharp edge of this campaign consists of reimagining 
Americanness and democracy as naturally aligned with nativist discourses of whiteness.
Such logic, still in operation today, reads that to be black is to be deviant and 
to be Muslim is to be a terrorist threat, and to be black and Muslim is to be branded 
un-American. 
 Black Star, Crescent Moon	finds	affinity	with	numerous	recent	studies	that	investigate
the politics and stakes of global solidarity since the 1960s. Students, scholars, 
and activists interested in black radical traditions that linked Islam with social justice, 
and the legacy of Third World alliances across race, class, and regional lines will 
 112
be	especially	drawn	to	this	work.	However,	the	study	would	have	benefitted	from	
an engagement with the politics of gender and radical feminist constructions of the 
Muslim International. This gap notwithstanding, Daulatzai’s argument concerning the 
wholesale framing of Muslims and African Americans as noncitizens and criminals 
is as urgent as it is compelling. 
Hampshire College Christopher M. Tinson
CELLULOID SERMONS: The Emergence of the Christian Film Industry, 1930–1986. 
By Terry Lindvall and Andrew Quicke. New York: New York University Press. 2011.
	 Lindvall	and	Quicke	traced	the	corpus	of	filmmaking,	and	the	film-related	activities
of organizations or individuals who sought to evangelize, preach, teach, provoke, 
or	convert	through	the	medium	of	16mm	film—otherwise	known	as	celluloid	sermons.	
As the title indicates, the authors focused on the period of 1930–1986. However, 
they contextualized Christian “talkies” with the purposes, technological challenges, 
and	failures	and	successes	of	silent	Christian	films	such	as	King of Kings written by 
Jeanie Macpherson and directed by Cecil B. DeMille, 1927. Discussions of post1986
films	such	as	The Passion of the Christ (2004) serve as the closing bookend to 
situate	the	text’s	target	period	along	the	trajectory	of	the	Christian	filmmaking.	
 The authors focused on the activities of Protestant churches, but included the 
activities	and	influences	of	Catholic	churches,	clergy,	and	laymen	in	the	ecumenical	
crusade against the perceived lack of morals being projected at twenty-four frames 
per second on theater screens across America. Lindvall and Quicke chronicle the 
involvement	of	organizations	created	to	support	and	manage	the	Christian	film	industry,
and the roles played by existing Christian and secular organizations. Various 
forms of support came from companies like Eastman Kodak, corporate magnates, 
and other wealthy individuals. The appendix, Chronology of Christian Film History, 
helps the reader to follow the discussion of the overlapping histories. 
	 Readers	are	helped	to	appreciate	the	challenges	faced	by	the	Christian	film	industry
in	its	struggle	to	utilize	film	technology	for	its	own	purposes	and	audiences.	For	
example,	filmmaker	Ken	Anderson’s	primary	aim	was	effective	messaging	regarding	
Christian training and discipleship. He was criticized for “simply producing radio 
drama	on	film”	(140).	Mel	White	eventually	worked	on	a	group	of	biographical	films	
based on the twenty-third psalm. Though I Walk Through the Valley, based on the life 
of Tony Brouwer, follows the struggle of a Christian college professor living with 
terminal	cancer.	It	is	one	of	the	first	films	to	record	the	last	year	in	the	life	of	a	dying	
man.	The	authors	reported	that	the	reality	film	“horrified	and	humbled”	one	viewer	as	
“the brazen camera intrudes on the intensely private suffering of a family watching 
the	husband	and	father	die”	(137).	It	can	be	argued	that	such	a	film	would	not	shock	
or awe today. Lindvall and Quicke provided numerous examples that demonstrate 
how	several	genres	resulted	from	the	varied	interests	of	Christian	filmmakers.	For	
the	Christian	film	industry	there	seems	to	have	been	a	constant	struggle	between	
didactic	messages	verses	entertainment.	The	authors	explicate	how	opening	up	film	
studies	for	Christian	students	moved	Christian	films	away	from	this	struggle	toward	
 113
adopting	Hollywood	cinematic	techniques	and	narrative	styles	that	generated	more	
appeal for their audience and created new audiences. 
	 The	authors	acknowledged	leaving	out	“significant	and	valuable	contributions”	
made	by	filmmakers,	religious	groups,	and	secular	organizations	(xiv).	However,	they	
hint that there is a “next part” to this story (218). It is an opportunity for the authors 
to include some of what they have missed in this highly informative volume. 
Independent Scholar, Kansas City, Missouri Z. Hall
CORN PALACES AND BUTTER QUEENS: A History of Crop Art and Dairy 
Sculpture. By Pamela H. Simpson. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 2012. 
 Don’t let the trim size fool you. Corn Palaces and Butter Queens’ large size and 
splashy cover seems designed to sell in the gift shop at the Mitchell, South Dakota, 
Queens’s Corn Palace, but Simpson has pulled together a new and serious work of 
cultural studies. Providing a highly readable narrative of the history and meaning of 
corn palaces, crop art, and butter sculpture from 1870 to 1930, in its best moments 
the book details the extent to which these forms of material culture were “testimony 
to the gospel of progress” (xvi). The book’s main themes trace “democracy and providence,”
“modernism and progress,” and most over-archingly, “abundance” in cereal 
architecture (xix). Loaded with evocative color and black-and-white advertisements, 
photographs, and line drawings from magazines, Simpson includes images as essential 
texts, but sadly often refrains from deconstructing them in depth. While very engaging,
Corn Palaces rarely confronts current academic debates about nineth-century 
Manifest Destiny and cultures of domestic empire. To this reviewer, the artistic and 
ideological issues which underlie narratives about abundance and progress in this era 
are inseparable from the same issues which underlie national expansion. Also, the 
best analysis here often comes at the end of chapters, or is saved for the conclusion 
of the book. Chapter 5, “Boosters, Saracens, and Indians,” most effectively narrates 
how butter and corn arts have borne larger expansionist ideologies. But here again, 
Simpson’s recounting of the Winnebago Indian presence at various Corn Palace celebrations
holds out too long in explaining that corn art was consistently rearticulated 
as “a symbol of white triumph” (135). In the last chapter, “An Ongoing Tradition,” 
contemporary	butter	and	corn	art	is	blithely	celebrated,	rather	than	critiqued	within	the	
ongoing agricultural aesthetics of abundance today. Serious, and endemic, agribusiness
problems with “King Corn” are also left for the conclusion and even there given 
short shrift, effectively buttering over the contemporary industrial food problems 
these types of historical displays and celebrations have clearly been precursors to. 
Also, for as much time as is spent on butter and corn, the author rarely engages issues 
of the use of these artistic media. What has made corn and butter especially easy or 
useful media, beyond their clear literal and symbolic abundance in the Midwest? 
Somewhat understandably, perhaps a more politicized rendering of cereal and butter
architectures was minimized for its consumption by a wider popular audience. 
Nonetheless, Simpson’s focus on women artists and assembly of little-used sources 
throughout the book is refreshing. Sadly, Corn Palaces and Butter Queens has been 
 114
released	one	year	after	Professor	Simpson’s	passing.	Whatever	its	flaws,	the	book’s	
liveliness	seems	a	fitting	tribute	to	her	long	career	as	a	valued	teacher-scholar.
Northland College Erica Hannickel
COLORS OF CONFINEMENT: Rare Kodachrome Photographs of Japanese American
Incarceration in World War II. Edited by Eric Mueller. Chapel Hill: University 
of North Carolina Press. 2012. 
 Colors of Confinement is a disturbing portrait of America’s World War II shame, 
the incarceration of 110,000 Japanese Americans and Nationals. Bill Manbo’s Heart 
Mountain amateur Kodachrome photographs of friends and family paint a poignant 
picture. The narratives and scholarly essays combine with the photos to forge a powerful
statement. As humans we see the world in color, so the Kodachrome images 
convey the circumstances, as we would experience them if we were there. This level 
of reality is something that existing black and white camp photos cannot duplicate. 
In addition, Manbo’s work is authentic unlike the propaganda photos taken by white 
WRA photographers who often times photographed meanings they brought and 
not what they witnessed. Through Manbo’s camera lens it is painfully evident that 
internees were not criminals or enemies of the state but hardworking men, strong 
women, and playful children. 
  Manbo shows us a community that was effectively raped by their own government
and in response they fought the stigma by diligently pursuing normal lives. Had 
they mentally embraced the rape as appropriate, it would have caused untold personal 
damage to already fragile psyches. As a result, his photographs contain a perspective 
of normalcy that belies the incongruous prison circumstances behind barbed wire and 
under the shadow of guard towers: Manbo’s father-in-law and mother-in-law pose in 
their Sunday best much like the “American Gothic” painting by Grant Wood, Boy 
Scouts proudly carry the stars and stripes, his son scales a barbed wire fence like a 
jungle gym, his relatives pose and smile in a group photo, and the Bon Odori festival 
dancers celebrate and honor the dead.
  Bill Manbo’s understated style illuminates “irony” on multiple levels. The Bon 
Odori participants honor ancestors whose ethnic backgrounds caused the dancers to 
be incarcerated. As we examine the photos of the kimonoed dancers today, it is hard 
to imagine that many of these vibrant people are now dead. Just as they danced in 
1943, their children and relatives now dance for them.
  Understandably there are ironies not explicitly addressed by Manbo. None of his 
photos contain white people. None document the fact that many young men either 
volunteered	or	were	drafted	to	fight	in	the	U.S.	Army.	None	show	the	shame	and	
suffering	bottled	up	in	the	hearts	of	the	victims.	None	foreshadow	the	difficulty	of	
returning home, starting new lives, or the 1988 government apology and redress.
  As someone involved with the Seattle Japanese American Citizens’ League Pride 
and Shame traveling exhibit in 1970, which evolved into the impetus for national 
redress, I recommend Sadamu Shimabukuro’s book entitled Born in Seattle: The 
Campaign for Japanese American Redress.
 115
  After redress, “What tasks remain for the victims and community?” Japanese 
Americans	were	the	first	to	suffer	the	injustice	and	as	a	result	have	a	responsibility	
to tell their American story and to ensure that it never happens again. This is their 
legacy and one major theme of the book. A few borrowed lines from my unpublished 
poem after 9-11 entitled “Legacy” elaborate my thoughts.
 
 I won’t turn my back
in silence knowing vultures
will descend on shuttered stores
and homes when hate
stains holy walls.
 
Who will stand
on granite mosque stairs,
link arms with brown brothers
and sisters?
 
I will stand for my
Mother and Father,
who sixty years ago
could not stand against US Army
bayonets, Browning rifles,
President Roosevelt
and Executive Order 9066.
   
Block 26, Barrack #2, WRA ID # 11464D
Minidoka, Idaho Lawrence Y. Matsuda
CRUEL AND UNUSUAL: The American Death Penalty and the Founders’ Eighth 
Amendment. By John D. Bessler. Boston: Northeastern University Press. 2012.
 “Nor shall cruel and unusual punishment be imposed.” Professor Bessler, an 
associate professor at the University of Baltimore School of Law and an adjunct 
professor	at	 the	Georgetown	University	Law	Center,	 focuses	on	 these	final	eight	
words of the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution in his book Cruel 
and Unusual. This clause, applicable to the States via the Due Process Clause of the 
Fourteenth Amendment, is the only Constitutional limitation on the federal and state 
governments’ authority to punish its citizens. 
	 The	Eighth	Amendment	also	places	substantive,	but	unspecified	limitations,	on	
bail	and	fines.	While	the	imposition	of	bail	or	a	fine	can	give	rise	to	important	questions,
the cruel and unusual punishment clause is the constitutional workhorse of the 
Eighth Amendment. This clause has been interpreted by the United States Supreme 
Court	to	require	that	the	punishment	of	non-capital	crimes	be	proportional,	to	require	
 116
that	the	treatment	of	prisoners	and	the	conditions	of	confinement	be	humane,	and	to	
prevent the use of torture or other unnecessarily painful treatment as punishment. 
 The Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause is, most importantly, the constitutional
provision that the United States Supreme Court has relied on to govern and 
give meaning to the use of the death penalty in the United States, both the methods of 
execution and the procedures by which the penalty may be imposed during the trial 
process. The opinions issued by the Supreme Court on the death penalty, primarily 
since 1972, rely on the history of the Amendment and its current use in America. 
Paralleling this structure, Professor Bessler explores both the Founding Fathers’ 
understandings of the meaning of the clause and its interpretation and use through 
America’s history. In the end, although the book could have been edited to provide 
more	flow,	less	repetition,	and	a	generally	tighter	construction,	Bessler	concludes	
that	 the	revolution	 inherent	 in	 the	American	democratic	experiment	 requires	 that	
opponents of capital punishment more actively seek its abolition. 
 Professor Bessler spends more than half of his book meticulously outlining the 
Founding Fathers’ beliefs and opinions about the death penalty, exploring the wide 
variety of literature that was available to them as well as their own words. Bessler 
explores the English roots of the cruel and unusual punishment clause and discusses 
the common meanings of the words. His research demonstrates that “original intent” 
is not monolithic. The Founding Fathers had complex opinions about capital punishment;
they were not wholly and totally convinced that capital punishment was always 
a correct penal response, even in cases of heinous crimes. 
 Professor Bessler, backed by in depth historical research, argues that the drafters 
of the Bill of Rights, including the Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause, meant 
for interpretation of the clause to adapt as society progressed. He concludes that an 
“originalist” should accept changing interpretation of the clause. Professor Bessler’s 
research is in direct response to those on the Court, perhaps most notably Antonin 
Scalia, who adhere to the conclusion that since capital punishment was known and 
widely in use at the time of the adoption of the Eighth Amendment, then it is beyond 
question	that	the	use	of	capital	punishment	is	acceptable	under	the	Constitution	today.
Overcoming this familiar “original intent” interpretation is no easy task, but the 
historical record compiled by Professor Bessler is impressive. Cruel and Unusual 
develops a much needed historical record showing that the Founding Fathers and the 
drafters of the Bill of Rights were not thoughtless supporters of capital punishment 
who expected and hoped that the practice would be continued throughout the history 
of the country and used by the government they formed. 
 On the foundation of his conclusion that the drafters of the Bill of Rights did not 
intend an unwavering adherence to the use of capital punishment, Professor Bessler 
places his second, overriding, purpose—presenting a case for the abolition of the 
death penalty. For Bessler, death is no longer a legitimate punishment for even the 
worst crimes. First, he bases his case for abolition in his historical interpretations. 
The Bill of Rights was adopted to protect American citizens from the potential 
overreaching	of	the	government.	Based	on	his	historical	research,	Bessler	identifies	
non-discrimination as the core principle of the Eighth Amendment. The amendment 
 117
was meant to prevent unfair and disparate treatment. Finally, as a historical matter, 
Bessler concludes that the interpretation of the Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause 
was intentionally left to the courts and was meant to change and develop. 
 To strengthen his call for abolition, Bessler discusses the historical and modern 
use of the death penalty, the development of its legal interpretation and abolition 
movements through time. This part of the book will be familiar to those who follow 
the debate, but also accessible to those who would like a detailed discussion of the 
death penalty in the modern and contemporary eras. These chapters examine the 
myriad of troubling issues surrounding the imposition and implementation of the 
death penalty. He explores the change in executions from public spectacles on town 
greens to private events inside prisons. He describes the change from swift executions 
in colonial times to the development of the “death row phenomenon,” the mental 
deterioration of inmates spending years and decades in harsh death row conditions. 
He notes that the American Medical Association and the American Psychological 
Association declare that physicians should not assist with executions or medicating 
inmates	to	render	them	competent	for	execution.	He	chronicles	the	ebb	and	flow	of	
public opinion about capital punishment. Bessler also catalogues America’s failure 
in	the	international	arena;	America	keeps	company	with	China,	Iran,	Iraq,	Pakistan	
and Sudan, as countries that most use death as a punishment. 
 For Bessler, as for many opponents of capital punishment, use of death as a 
punishment is no longer merely a legislative choice of penalty, but a true human 
rights violation. The protection of the human right to life, in Bessler’s analysis, is 
an imperative supported by the historical record and made necessary by the current 
abysmal record compiled by America’s use of death as punishment. If the Eighth 
Amendment is a check on the government’s right to do violence to its citizens, then 
the governmental execution of one of its citizens renders the Cruel and Unusual 
Punishment Clause, unacceptably, a nullity. 
 Cruel and Unusual	is	a	long,	sometimes	slow,	read,	but	Bessler	significantly	
contributes to the literature by providing a compelling interpretation of the “original 
intent” of the Eighth Amendment’s Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause. He also 
makes a compelling revolutionary argument that if we wish to be the country that 
was foreseen and hoped for by our forefathers, we must abolish the death penalty. 
Benjamin Rush proclaimed in 1873, and he is seconded by Professor Bessler in 2012, 
“THE REVOLUTION IS NOT OVER!” (339).
University of Kansas School of Law Elizabeth Cateforis
DEMOCRATIC NARRATIVE, HISTORY, AND MEMORY. Edited by Carole A. 
Barbato and Laura L. Davis. Kent: Kent State University Press. 2012.
 This book grew out of the 2009 meeting of the annual “Symposium on Democracy”
at Kent State University. Established in 2000, the symposium is both “a living 
memorial” to those who died in the May 4, 1970 shootings, and an opportunity to 
promote “scholarship that seeks to prevent violence and to promote democratic values 
and civil discourse” (viii). The 2009 symposium’s title was “Re-membering: Framing, 
 118
Embracing, Revising History,” and the volume’s three sections deal, accordingly, with 
(I) balancing historical events and “eternal concerns,” (II) “shaping public memory 
and raising public consciousness” via media culture, and (III) examining “acts of 
remembrance and reconciliation within local communities” (viii-ix).
 The editors, Carole Barbato and Laura Davis, argue that the historical meanings 
discussed in this volume hold “relevance for a particular community but also [speak] 
indelibly to the human community,” making “meaning of past history in order to 
serve the future” (ix). Using the Kent State tragedy as its starting point, the collection 
dives into timeless topics such as dissent, war, peace, race, globalization, and state 
power. All of this is handled both provocatively and, at times, awkwardly.
	 The	first	 section	 eases	 the	 reader	 into	 historical	 events,	 covering	 early	 anniversaries
and international reverberations of the 1970 shootings. That said, the 
fact-based “This We Know” chronicle, composed by the editors plus Mark Seeman 
and provided as an appendix, ought to be read by the uninitiated before tackling the 
first	essays.	Closing	the	section	is	Jay	Winter’s	provocative,	philosophical	piece	on	
the virtues and vices of socially constructed silence. The next section’s media culture 
essays are a positive—as much about the meaning of journalism as about Kent State. 
Edward Morgan’s piece stands out as an excellent introduction to sixties-era media 
coverage	and	biases.	In	the	final	section,	Renee	Romano’s	contribution	is	impressive,	
exploring	the	benefits	of	“turning	to	models	popular	outside	the	United	States”	in	
order to “grapple with . . . contested history”: a truth and reconciliation commission 
(160-61). He discusses this in relation to the 1979 shooting of anti-Klan activists in 
Greensboro, NC, but argues it should be applied to violent historical events where 
history and memory are contested (161-62).
 The most disappointing aspect of this volume, in relation to the topics advertised 
in its title, is its relative silence on the headlining adjective “democratic.” It is present
explicitly in the Devan Bissonette essay (section two), and implicitly in Cathy J. 
Collins’s recounting of the struggle to commemorate school desegregation in Little 
Rock (section three). Even Winter’s piece would have been stronger in relation to the 
volume if it had addressed the topic of silence in a democracy—i.e., Can democracy 
stand silence, no matter the latter’s usefulness? Instead, the excellence of Winter’s 
essay	merely	fits	 into	a	constellation	of	essays	only	loosely	related	to	 the	book’s	
title. Given the unevenness with which the primary essays address the “democratic” 
adjective, one might expect the section introductions—which attempt to tie together 
the contributions—to do that heavy lifting. Sadly, those pieces generally neglect both 
descriptive and normative discussions of democratic narrative, history, and memory.
	 Despite	its	deficiencies	in	making	“democratic”	theory	and	applications	explicit,	
this is an informative, thoughtful volume that will educate the reader on the Kent 
State tragedy, as well as the problems of memory, contested narratives, commemoration,
and social justice. The book could be fruitfully utilized in undergraduate and 
graduate courses on public history, the Sixties, historical theory/methods, and postwar 
America, as well as by professional public historians.
Loyola University Chicago Tim Lacy
 119
HENRY FORD’S WAR ON JEWS AND THE LEGAL BATTLE AGAINST HATE 
SPEECH. By Victoria Saker Woeste. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 2012.
 Victoria Saker Woeste’s, Henry Ford’s War on Jews and the Legal Battle Against 
Hate Speech,	 contributes	 significantly	 to	our	understanding	of	 the	dramatic	 libel	
lawsuit brought by Aaron Sapiro against the American automotive pioneer. Woeste’s 
meticulously researched book thoughtfully examines the complex circumstances and 
personalities behind the case, the intricacies of the trial, and the implications of its 
resolution. She analyzes Sapiro’s suit within the framework of American libel law 
and argues compellingly that, contrary to most interpretations, the case represented 
a lost opportunity in the struggle against hate speech. 
 The book draws on previously published biographies, as well as new archival 
research, trial transcripts, and interviews to portray the major players in the lawsuit 
and	the	conflicts	among	them.	In	the	years	following	WWI,	Henry	Ford	increasingly	
embraced anti-Semitism, and in 1920 turned his newspaper, The Dearborn Independent,
into a medium through which to voice his concerns about “the disproportion-
ate	influence	of	the	Jews	on	politics,	culture,	entertainment,	diplomacy,	industrial	
capitalism, and the state” (47). Over the next several years, Ford published a series 
of accusations about individual Jews and “International Jewry.” Louis Marshall, a 
prominent attorney and President of the American Jewish Committee, was among 
those targeted by the paper. He responded by urging restraint, arguing that Jews were 
better off demonstrating good citizenship than stooping to respond to anti-Semites. 
The paper also attacked Aaron Sapiro, a lawyer involved in organizing farmers’ marketing
cooperatives. Incensed by charges of personal and professional misconduct, 
Sapiro rejected Marshall’s path of restraint, and opted instead to sue one of the most 
powerful men in America for libel.
 Woeste’s book chronicles the case of Sapiro v. Ford, detailing the strategies 
employed	by	defense	and	prosecution,	and	contrasting	Sapiro’s	quest	for	vindication	
in an individual libel suit with Marshall’s behind-the-scenes pursuit of a means to 
silence the voices of anti-Semitism. In many accounts, Marshall emerges as the hero, 
ending the legal proceedings by extracting from Ford an apology to “the Jews” and 
a	promise	to	stop	publishing	anti-Semitic	material.	Woeste	questions	this	interpretation
of events. She argues that Marshall might have used the apology to reinforce 
the still-ambiguous concept of group, rather than individual, libel in American law, 
thus effectively combatting anti-Jewish hate speech. Instead, she depicts him as 
outmaneuvered by Ford, who appreciated that an apology would free him from the 
headaches of the lawsuit, but without legal enforceability, offer virtually nothing of 
substance	to	either	Sapiro	or	the	fight	against	anti-Semitism.
 Woeste’s study clearly reveals the pervasiveness of anti-Jewish sentiment in 
American society, but interestingly it also demonstrates its limits. Woeste takes note 
of the many farmers, organizers, and ultimately, jurors who supported Sapiro. This 
aspect of the case is worth further consideration for what it reveals about the complexities
of	American	anti-Semitism	during	the	interwar	period,	and	the	difficulty	of	
determining	how	best	to	fight	it.	Woeste’s	book,	however,	offers	a	fascinating	and	
 120
rewarding account of Sapiro v. Ford, and what the case teaches us about hate speech, 
libel law, and the anti-Jewish crusade of an American icon.
Muhlenberg College Jessica Cooperman
IN THE CROSSFIRE: Marcus Foster and the Troubled History of American School 
Reform. By John P. Spencer. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 2012.
	 Those	who	study	the	history	of	education	realize	that	there	are	no	quick	fixes	
for	providing	equal	educational	opportunity	for	all.	Throughout	America’s	educational
history, some groups (Whites and European immigrants) were given increased 
participation in public schooling while others groups (people of color, women and 
non-European immigrants) continually faced limitations. After more than a century 
of limited schooling opportunities for African Americans nationwide, and shortened 
efforts	to	address	inequality,	a	new	breed	of	school	reformers	believe	that	addressing	
the achievement gap, devoid of lessons from the 1960s will be the cure all for the 
problems of urban school reform. John P. Spencer poses the biographical experiences 
of Marcus Foster as a “cautionary lesson” for current school reformers. In Marcus 
Foster, author John Spencer writes, “we see that problems of access, of achievement,
of resources, of responsibility, were more complicated than they appeared to 
be in polarized public debates over who was to blame” (3). Furthermore, Foster’s 
story provides a sense of what is possible with school reform while confronting the 
restrictions of that same reform.
 In the Crossfire chronicles the school leadership experiences of Marcus Foster. 
As the principal of three Philadelphia schools and the superintendent of Oakland 
Public Schools, Foster was able to turn around schools others considered a failure. 
With compensatory funding, Foster targeted teacher expectations, student and parental 
attitudes and involvement, as well as community and business support to revitalize the 
educational environments of the schools and district he led. His charming personality 
as well as his ability to bring diverse people together to solve school problems served 
as	an	asset	in	fulfilling	his	goals.	Unlike	Foster,	current	school	reformers	have	taken	
a more adversarial approach by demonizing teachers and unions rather than working
with them to solve problems. Each time Foster became a principal at school, he 
gave teachers and other groups a seat at the table in determining how they would 
reform the school. This inspired the teachers and gave them buy-in for the changes 
that would be necessary at each school.
 Spencer argues convincingly that liberals in the post-World War II period expressed
conflicting	views	about	school	problems.	Some	blamed	the	school	system	
and racist society for problems students experienced in schools. Others used cultural 
deprivation arguments to determine that situations beyond the schools led to the 
problems by blaming the lack of abilities on students and their families. Marcus 
Foster’s leadership bridged this ideological divide among liberals. Foster took a 
more holistic approach to solving the problems in urban schools, recognizing both 
the	societal	and	familial	difficulties	his	students	faced.
 121
 This book is an important contribution to the debates currently occurring around 
school reform. The push for excellence, and high stakes testing as the solution to narrowing
the achievement gap without a concerted effort to provide additional funding 
for the schools with the most need, is simplistic. As Spencer rightly demonstrated, 
Foster made great strides in the schools he revitalized because he had additional 
compensatory funding to provide tutoring for students, outreach for communities, 
and additional services to improve the education of his students. It is doubtful his 
efforts would have been as effective without the additional aid. 
 This book is well written and researched. Foster’s experiences are well situated 
in the context of the times, and Spencer superbly incorporates Foster’s work in the 
crossfire	of	the	arguments	around	schooling	in	the	1960s.	Spencer	also	recognizes	
that	the	traditions	of	equality	and	of	excellence	have	been	long	a	part	of	the	Black	
community’s cultural ethos and Foster comes from that tradition. 
	 There	are	only	a	few	minor	critiques	that	can	be	made	of	an	otherwise	excellent	
book. First, the book is very repetitive, particularly with Spencer’s constantly rehashing
his arguments. He left no doubt in readers’ minds about what he was arguing. 
To a lesser extent, on a couple of occasions Spencer called nontraditional families 
“broken.” Discussing families as “broken” has become outdated. This terminology 
makes children of these families feel as if there is something wrong with the people 
who	come	together	to	give	them	a	home.	Additionally,	in	a	critique	of	proponents	of	
community control in Ocean Hill Brownsville, Spencer agreed with historian Jerald 
Podair’s assessment. Spencer determined that black educators’ rejection of white 
middle-class values did not accompany calls for “respect for learning, hard work, 
and a desire to improve one’s condition.” Blacks and Puerto Ricans have long demanded
educational excellence they believed some white educators failed to provide. 
Community control was an attempt to create an environment for that excellence to 
flourish,	not	an	opposition	 to	excellence.	Moreover,	 the	values	Spencer	spoke	of	
were not limited to the white middle class. Blacks and many poor people have long 
sought to improve their lives and have worked hard often in spite of minimal reward 
for that work. 
 In spite of these minor criticisms, this is an important study for those concerned 
with educational leadership, school reform, and the context for understanding current 
educational initiatives. Marcus Foster’s professional career highlights the tensions 
and possibilities in revitalizing urban educational systems. Spencer should be commended
for such an important and timely study.
Indiana University  Dionne Danns
PUTTING THE BARN BEFORE THE HOUSE: Women and Family Farming in 
Early Twentieth-Century New York. By Grey Osterud. Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press. 2012.
 In Putting the Barn Before the House,	Grey	Osterud	examines	the	first	forty	
years of the twentieth century and the complicated economic decisions made by rural 
women in the Nanticoke Valley of New York State. As the title implies, the major-
 122
ity of women in this demographically diverse community believed that the fruits of 
their	labor,	whether	from	the	home,	barn,	field,	or	off-farm	employment,	needed	to	
be reinvested in the family’s agricultural enterprise. The subject matter explored in 
this text is not new, but the diversity of the Valley results in historical conclusions 
that are different from those highlighting other regions of the country. Immigrant 
women often farmed while their husbands worked in town. Their commitment to 
owning land and keeping the farm made them more willing to re-invest in the farm 
with modern labor-saving technologies, but not the farm home. On farms with good 
soil and enough resources, families chose to concentrate on one crop, often dairy 
or poultry. On these farms some women actively participated in farming activities, 
while others adopted divisions of labor that mimicked the prescriptive literature 
and advice of agricultural reform groups, such as the state’s Cooperative Extension 
Service. Osterud’s real contribution is that she looks beyond class, exploring such 
issues as inheritance, marriage, and rural political and reform organizations. She 
clearly	demonstrates	that	no	one	factor	entirely	influenced	a	woman’s	perspective	
and that rural people are far from monolithic.
 The presence of Endicott Johnson and International Business Machines Corporation
(IBM) in nearby towns changed the make-up of neighborhoods as well as 
established off-farm employment options. Some farm families chose a single family 
member to earn regular wages in town, other families peddled crops to urban employees,
and still others adopted specialized farming businesses. Some abandoned 
farming for urban living after trying to survive on hilly and less fertile farms. In their 
wake	came	first	generation	immigrants,	mostly	from	Eastern	Europe,	who	purchased	
these farms and changed the community. Putting the Barn Before the House reveals 
the complicated nature of a rural community in transition.
 Putting the Barn Before the House is based on extensive oral histories, archival 
collections, manuscript collections, and printed sources. The depth of these sources 
is	reflected	in	the	detailed	narratives	and	analysis	devoted	to	each	individual—some	
serving as the sole subject of a chapter. This is Osterud’s second monograph detailing 
the history of farm women in Nanticoke Valley, which speaks to the rich primary 
source collections she uncovered related to the region. Her previous work, Bonds of 
Community, focused on the second half of the nineteenth century and the absence of 
the ideology of separate spheres in rural women’s lives. In this work, she continues 
that theme to looking at women’s decisions that prioritized the farm business over 
domestic comfort. Scholars interested in women’s studies, rural / agricultural studies, 
labor	studies,	and	immigration	would	all	benefit	from	the	important	conclusions	of	
Osterud’s work.
University of Kansas Sara E. Morris
QUEER ENVIRONMENTALITY. By Robert Azzarello. Burlington: Ashgate. 2012. 
 Queer Studies and Environmental Studies have not always been ready bedfellows.

 123
 According to Robert Azzarello, author of Queer Environmentality, that is because 
they have tended to operate under competing assumptions about what is “natural” in 
the world. On the one hand, Azzarello writes, Environmental Studies has tended, for 
its part, to depend on a heteronormative discourse of the “natural” (which it inherited 
from Darwinian evolutionism) that presumes that the primary goal of both human 
and non-human nature is to “survive and reproduce.” In such a discursive context, 
he says, everything that impedes or perverts those primary goals—from toxic oil 
spills	to	queer	men—gets	classed	casually,	and	often	unwittingly,	within	the	more	
problematic	category	of	the	“unnatural”	(4-5).	By	contrast,	Azzarello	writes,	the	field	
of Queer Studies has consistently voiced a “radical hermeneutic suspicion” of such 
simplistic	and	stable	definitions	of	humanity,	sexuality,	and	nature	(15).	
	 Azzarello’s	book	sets	out	to	overcome	this	impasse	by	finding	a	common	ground	
for	 exchange	between	 the	 two	fields.	 Its	 author	contends	 that	 a	more	productive	
exchange	might	come	about	if	we	were	to	cultivate	a	queer	environmentality	that	
was rooted in, as he puts it, “a habit of thought that conceptualizes human beings, 
other	life	forms,	and	their	environments	as	disregarding—and,	at	times,	flaunting	
their disregard for—the ostensibly primary, natural law ‘to survive and reproduce’” 
(4,	136).	Assuming	that	Azzarello	is	right,	this	queer	habit	of	thought	would	not	be	
entirely new. It is, he says, already embedded in our nation’s environmental literature, 
although we have been blinded to its existence because of our own hetero normative 
reading practices.
	 To	flesh	out	this	project	of	a	“queer	environmentality,”	Azzarello	reinterprets	the	
writings of four major American authors—Henry David Thoreau, Herman Melville, 
Willa Cather, and Djuna Barnes. He claims that each of these authors, despite their 
distance from one another in time and space, proposes in his or her distinct way a 
queer	rewriting	of	the	normative	relations	among	humans,	sex,	and	nature.	
 In discussing Thoreau, for instance, Azzarello reminds us that the erstwhile 
Romantic tossed aside his culture’s expectations of heterosexual marriage and the 
begetting	of	progeny	to	pursue	a	non-normative	eroticism	with	nature—a	queer	environmentality
that was tied up in rethinking the meaning of both human sensuality 
and human purpose. Azzarello explains that Thoreau’s novel reorientation to nature 
and the ontology that came out of that reorientation was always non-normative. On 
the one hand, he dared to celebrate the naturalness of homo sapiens as a decidedly 
animal species by replenishing the bodily sensuality in our encounters with nature, 
while, on the other, and paradoxically, he consistently strove to transcend both the 
notion of an un-problematized animal body and his own culture’s ontological assumptions
about human and non-human nature. In a sense, Thoreau freed up space, 
that	 is,	 for	a	queer	ethics	by	 rejecting	 received	binaries	and	by	 re-imagining	 the	
“human-animal-divine matrix” that framed mainstream Victorian discourse (54). 
Azzarello’s	other	sections	on	Melville,	Barnes,	and	Cather	offer	equally	interesting	
insights about how we might reread the canon of American environmental literature 
in similarly productive ways. 
 Queer Environmentality is an openly theoretical book that is carefully argued, 
and it will	likely	find	a	ready	audience	among	ecocritics	interested	in	the	type	of	
 124
questions	that	it	raises.	However,	given	the	book’s	overt	orientation	to	that	relatively	
rarified	readership,	I	suspect	that	it	will	have	trouble	finding	traction	or	making	waves	
in the broader environmental community that it sets out to persuade. 
National University Bob Johnson
SOCIAL DEATH: Racialized Rightlessness and the Criminalization of the Unprotected.
By Lisa Marie Cacho. New York: New York University Press. 2012.
 American law, according to Lisa Marie Cacho, is rife with de facto status crimes, 
defined	as	“specific	activities	 that	are	only	transparently	recognized	as	‘criminal’	
when they are attached to statuses that invoke race (gang member), ethnicity (‘illegal 
alien’), and/or national origin (suspected terrorist)” (43). California’s Proposition 
21, for example, attached extra penalties to “gang-related” violence, with “gangrelated”
being commonly understood as violence perpetrated by non-whites. Through 
examining this and other case studies of racialized rightlessness, Cacho’s Social 
Death proves itself an eye-opening account of how and why the American polity “is 
dependent upon the permanence of certain groups’ criminalization,” groups who are 
thus rendered functionally “ineligible for personhood” (6). 
 Among the archive of incidents whose larger meaning the author explicates are: 
popular	outcry	against	white	teenagers	being	charged	under	Proposition	21;	indefinite	
detention and deportation of a suspected Cambodian gang member; the placement of 
the so-called “War on Terror” within the broader context of “illegal” immigration; 
the situation of Elvira Arellano, who publicly resisted deportation in order to keep 
her	family	together;	and,	finally,	the	death	of	the	author’s	own	cousin	in	a	purported	
drunk-driving accident. For each of these, Cacho explicates how the legal system 
(and opinion makers such as journalists) judge certain racialized groups as inherently 
criminal	while	treating	whites	on	an	individual	basis	with	regard	to	specific	conduct	
(actus rea), not their de facto status. Those so criminalized by dint of status can seek 
recognition for their grievances “only by conforming to those U.S. heteronormative 
‘morals’	and	‘standards	of	living’	that,	ironically,	have	been	defined	over	and	against	
their very communities and their communities’ survival strategies”—and, through 
this appeal to respectability, essentially disavow others as deviant non-conformists 
(129). 
 Cacho’s work echoes Roberto Esposito’s Third Person (2012, English translation),
especially in their shared argument that human rights cannot be pursued based 
upon the notion of personhood since the concept of the person creates the division 
between	the	human	being	and	the	bearer	of	rights	in	the	first	place.	Like	Race Defaced:
Paradigms of Pessimism, Politics of Possibility by Christopher Kyriakides 
and Rodolfo D. Torres (2012), Social Death illustrates how the racial hierarchy of 
the United States exists as a function of transnational capitalism, how neoliberalism 
produces	arguments	for	individual	or	group	worth	that	obscure	the	question:	who	
benefits	from	the	placement	of	countless	people	into	a	state	of	social	death?	Cacho’s	
own strengths lie in pairing the broad-based, theoretical perspectives with an inti-
 125
mate gaze into the sphere of social death, illustrating how individuals are personally 
rendered non-persons by the neoliberal regime.
 In response to this system of racialized rightlessness, the author advocates for 
the practice of “unthinkable politics,” urging her readers to move beyond “realistic” 
approaches and instead “to be critical of what makes us vulnerable to state violences 
and what makes us susceptible to the state’s seductions” (145). Few books since 
Charles W. Mills’s The Racial Contract (1997) have so successfully paired a scholarly 
inquiry	into	the	mechanisms	of	white	supremacy	with	a	revolutionary	consciousness.	
Encyclopedia of Arkansas History & Culture Guy Lancaster
SUBVERSIVES: The FBI’s War on Student Radicals, and Reagan’s Rise to Power. 
By Seth Rosenfeld. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 2012.
 Subversives is a compelling and meticulously documented work of cultural history
that moves with the inexorable pace of tragedy, part Greek in its concatenation 
of events, deceptively unrelated but propelled as if by some strange design; part 
Shakespearean in its mammoth cast of characters, a mix of protagonists with tragic 
flaws	and	antagonists	too	lacking	in	self	knowledge	to	elicit	pity	and	fear.	
It all seemed so simple: Free Speech. Or so the students at the University of California
at Berkeley thought in 1964, when in the midst of a protest, a (then) philosophy 
major injected the voice of reason into what was turning into a shout-out. “My name 
is Mario Savio,” he declared, thus becoming a Hamlet in a tragedy-by-installments. 
Blazingly committed, with a crusader’s zeal, Savio only wanted students to enjoy 
their First Amendment Rights. His zeal set off the Free Speech Movement, which 
spiraled out of control and devolved into the Filthy Speech Movement. That was how 
the public perceived it. A notorious dance replete with drugs and sex undermined 
the cause even more. The students became “The Kids”; the police, “The Pigs,” and 
a	simple	plea	for	due	process	became	a	generational	conflict.	
  Although curricular reform was needed (e.g., an ethnic studies program), some 
of the demands made by counter organizations were so ludicrous that they alienated
many of the original sympathizers. Rosenfeld did not have to portray Savio as 
a	Hamlet	who	morphed	into	a	Christ	figure;	history	took	care	of	that.	Savio	went	
through his own agony in the garden—depression, homelessness, panic attacks, a 
failed marriage. But still he managed to graduate summa cum laude with a degree 
in physics from San Francisco State, from which he later received a master’s. The 
years	of	protest	took	their	toll.	Savio	died	of	heart	problems	in	1996,	a	mere	fiftythree.
Clark Kerr, Berkeley’s president, was also a tragic scapegoat, but enjoyed a 
longer life, dying at 92. He was a victim of both history and J. Edgar Hoover, who 
believed informants’ reports that Kerr was too far to the left. When the Free Speech 
Movement galvanized Berkeley, Kerr was faced with an impossible situation: how 
to keep the campus from succumbing to anarchy. When the demonstrations turned 
ominous, Ronald Reagan, then California governor, argued that they were Communistinstigated.
Reagan	became	a	major	player	in	the	offstage	drama	to	have	Kerr	fired.	
 Savio and Kerr could not withstand the juggernaut of the FBI and Reagan, whose 
 126
anti-Communist paranoia began in 1946 when he started cooperating with the FBI 
after	becoming	convinced	of	Communist	infiltration	of	the	movie	business.	Ironically,
in 1938, according to Reagan’s biographer, Edmund Morris, Reagan, then a 
liberal with a concern for the marginalized and the dispossessed, considered joining 
the Communist Party (Dutch, 158).	Equally	ironic	is	that,	as	an	undergraduate	at	
Eureka College, Reagan advocated a student strike when programs were in jeopardy 
because of restructuring. But that was in 1928. One wonders how Reagan’s political 
career would have fared if he retained his idealism. 
 Subversives is a monumental achievement. Read it and wonder how much talent 
was lost in the cataclysm that might have been averted if the need for recognition 
were divorced from the fear of radicalization. One erratum: Larry Parks did not win 
an Oscar for The Jolson Story (1946), although he was nominated. The best actor 
Oscar went to Frederic March for The Best Years of Our Lives (1946), which the 
House	on	Un-American	Activities	Committee	(HUAC)	found	questionable	because	
it implied that WWII veterans had problems adjusting to civilian life. Such were the 
times. Subversives	should	be	required	reading	for	the	social	network	generation,	who	
don’t know how good they have it. 
Fairleigh Dickinson University, Teaneck Campus Bernard F. Dick
THE VOICE IS ALL: The Lonely Victory of Jack Kerouac. By Joyce Johnson. New 
York: Viking. 2012.
 In Joyce Johnson’s insightful 1999 biography, Minor Characters, we are introduced
to Jack Kerouac as a dynamic and pathetic man, bursting with words and ideas, 
trying to balance living by his ideals with spectral and real familial responsibilities. 
It’s a beautiful recounting of Kerouac in all of his complexity—neither a hagiography
nor bitter tell-all, her memoir panoramically captures Kerouac at a moment 
when he stares deer-eyed at the approaching fame that would soon envelop him. In 
Johnson’s biography, The Voice is All, the younger Kerouac is in focus, from his birth 
in Lowell, Massachusetts, to around 1951, years before the publication of On The 
Road. Although it does not break new ground, it is a well-written reminder of the 
chaos and intensity of Kerouac’s and the other Beats’ lives—“the beautiful angels” 
were a hard-living bunch whose egotistical search for “truth,” painstakingly recorded 
in their own works, is still surprisingly fresh when retold by Johnson. Her intimate 
knowledge of Kerouac and his life, along with her desire to protect him from his 
legions of critics, lends a continual sharpness to her writing as her crisp sentences 
illuminate without being showy. 
 While there are stronger biographies of Kerouac—Gerald Nicosia’s Memory 
Babe is the most authoritative—Johnson’s focus on Kerouac’s French Canadian 
childhood, which she persuasively (although not conclusively) pinpoints as the source 
for his linguistic experimentation, is its most welcome addition. For example, she 
uncovers	a	fifty-seven-page	manuscript	“Les	Travaux	de	Michel	Bregne”	in	which	
Kerouac experiments writing in French as a way to get at his authentic speech—
which Johnson claims partially allowed Kerouac to be free to write On the Road in 
 127
its spontaneous prose style. Is this true? We mostly have to take Johnson’s word for 
it because she does not elaborate or explain.
 This is the main frustration of the biography. Johnson had access to the Kerouac
archive in the Berg collection at the New York Public Library. In itself, this is 
exciting—a wonderful writer with intimate knowledge of Kerouac, pouring over his 
unpublished texts, could certainly lead to new discoveries. However, she was not 
given	permission	to	quote	extensively	from	these	works,	and	while	there	are	numerous	
mentions	of	the	Berg	material,	they	feel	like	unqualified	asides	rather	than	important	
additions to Kerouac scholarship. The result, then, is that this book feels more like 
a good reiteration of stories you have heard before: Johnson recounts—in all of its 
raw exuberance and sordid details—the “lonely” life of Kerouac by focusing on his 
beliefs, loves, and early writing career. Is it somewhat sensational? You bet. But for 
Kerouac fans whose shelves sag under the weight of books by and about him, this 
will	be	a	fine,	although	nonessential,	addition.	
University of South Florida John Lennon
 128
