The Smeller’s (Almost Always) a Feller: A Sensory Studies 
Approach to Examining Gender and Sexuality across Nine 
Faulkner Texts 
Laura Davis
The Faulkner Journal, Volume 28, Number 2, Fall 2014, pp. 53-77 (Article)
Published by Johns Hopkins University Press
DOI:
For additional information about this article
Access provided at 28 Feb 2020 04:38 GMT from JHU Libraries
https://doi.org/10.1353/fau.2014.0003
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/708728/summary
 The Smeller’s (Almost Always) a Feller: 
A Sensory Studies Approach to Examining Gen­
der and Sexuality across Nine Faulkner Texts
... maybe smell is one of my sharper senses, maybe its sharper 
than sight.... [Smell] to me is as noticeable as the ear which 
hears the turns of speech ....
—William Faulkner, Faulkner in the University (253)
A
s a variety of critics have noted over the years, William Faulkner’s 
stories, vividly and descriptively set in the US South, not only con­
tain intricate characters and plots, but also depict a rich and detailed 
sensory world. Much of the extant criticism engaged in Faulkners 
use of the senses centers on a short story in The Unvanquished, “An Odor of 
Verbena.” For example, Robert Witt links the pervasive smell of verbena with 
courage; subsequently, Maryanne M. Gobble interprets the smell of verbena as 
a symbol of courage, peace, and a new era in the South. Other similar “scent- 
as-symbol” analyses of Faulkner include pieces by Patricia Beam (who exam­
ines scent in The Wild Palms)-, Lorie Watkins Fulton (who focuses on scent in 
The Sound and the Fury and Absalom, Absalom!); and Paul Carmignani, who 
traces the symbolic meaning of scents across multiple Faulkner texts. The com­
monality in all of this important work is an attempt to connect a specific sense 
(in these cases, the sense of smell) with a certain symbolic meaning within 
individual texts. In other words, critics have tended to assert that if we can find 
a repeated mention of a certain smell, such as the scent of verbena, and identify 
what it symbolizes, we can give it meaning, which has been a valuable strategy 
in interpreting Faulkner’s work.
Recently, however, a critically important new framework has begun 
emerging for the study of the senses, one which could prove a useful aid to the 
study of the senses in Faulkners fiction. Sensory studies, a relatively recent but 
rapidly growing field, draws on the work of notable anthropologists, histori­
ans, and others in the humanities and social sciences who study the intersec­
tion of senses and society. As David Howes writes, “Sensory studies involves 
a cultural approach to the study of the senses and a sensory approach to the 
study of culture ... by foregrounding the sociality of sensation” (“Expanding”). 
Namely, rather than examining the description of a particular scent (or sound 
or taste) as a symbol to be interpreted as holding a certain meaning, sensory 
studies scholars focus more on the senses as a biased human act, an act that is
53
 54 Laura Davis A Sensory Studies Approach to Nine Faulkner Texts
committed and interpreted differently depending on who is doing the sensing 
and when, as well as what historical and cultural beliefs that person may hold.
Sensory historian Mark Smith gives the following example about studying 
depictions of smell in historical print sources:
[B]reezy, implicit reference to the senses can amount to an unwitting surrender to the 
power structures of the past and comes perilously near to repeating them. Historians 
who quote a nineteenth-century observers characterization of immigrant homes as 
reeking—“The filth and smell are intolerable”—leave the impression that the descrip­
tion was objectively and universally “true.” What we really need to know is whose 
nose was doing the smelling, how the definition of “smell” changed over time and 
according to constituency (did the people living in the “filth” agree?) and how the 
characterization was used to justify actions by middle class reformers. Absent such 
explicit commentary, we present the past on the terms set by the reformer’s nose and 
all of the prejudices and values that inhered in that nose. (“Producing” 843)
In addition to the work of historians like Smith, a significant breadth of work 
focused on sensory studies has emerged in both anthropology and geography. 
It should be noted that in both of these fields this turn toward studying the 
juncture of the senses and human behavior has been employed frequently via 
the immediacy of fieldwork or ethnography. Though literary studies by nature 
involves a more linguistically mediated representation of human society, lit­
erature’s overarching focus on characters and their actions still provides an in­
triguing, albeit fictional, realm in which to study the interaction of culture and 
the use of the senses. Indeed, there are at least two notable pieces of Faulkner 
criticism that point to the potential value of a sensory studies approach to liter­
ary criticism: Karl F. Zender’s “Faulkner and the Power of Sound,” which is one 
of the few aural studies of Faulkner, and Terri Smith Ruckel’s doctoral disserta­
tion, “The Scent of a New World Novel: Translating the Olfactory Language 
of Faulkner and Garcia Marquez.” Both of these authors begin to explore how 
non-visual senses, behavior, and cultural beliefs are intertwined in Faulkners 
works.
However, since Zender and Ruckel’s work centers on only three of 
Faulkners texts, given Faulkner’s prolific output, this article utilizes a sensory 
studies approach to studying gender and sexuality in nine of Faulkner’s texts, 
particularly how characters use their senses of smell (and occasionally their re­
lated senses of taste) to make and/or avoid judgments and to navigate a web of 
social values regarding gender and sexual taboos. In essence, it asks what larger 
sensory and cultural patterns or tropes might emerge in Faulkner’s fiction if we 
pivot from the established study of scent as symbolic noun to a new examination 
of smelling as an active verb. By querying who gets to smell whom and who is 
interpreted as smelling like what, patterns reveal the characters’ beliefs about 
gender and sexual mores.
 The Faulkner Journal Fall 2014 55
I. Sensory Studies and Literature
In his 2013 overview of the current state of sensory studies, David Howes cites 
the origins of the field as emerging in the 1980s and 90s with the publication of 
several seminal works, primarily in anthropology and history, and with a veri­
table explosion of work in these fields and others during the first decade and a 
half of this century (“Expanding”). The 1994 publication of Aroma: The Cultur­
al History of Smell by Constance Classen, David Howes, and Anthony Synnott 
is particularly relevant to an exploration of smell in Faulkner. Respectively, the 
three authors hold doctoral degrees in religious studies, anthropology, and so­
ciology, and the resulting text is a truly interdisciplinary examination of smell 
and its impact on a variety of social structures. In particular, the authors cover 
the changing interpretations of smells from antiquity through the Middle Ages 
and into to the present day, successfully refuting the premise that the ways hu­
mans interpret smells stays constant over time or across cultures.
Additionally, the text is powerful in its examination of how smell affects 
social and anthropological rites and rituals and how it may even shape political 
beliefs. Sensory studies texts like this one that insist upon examining beliefs 
about the senses in terms of social and political power structures can be very 
useful for literary critics searching for similar hierarchical structures in litera­
ture. As the authors of Aroma write, “[S]mell is hardly ever considered as a po­
litical vehicle or a medium for the expression of class allegiances and struggles. 
None the less, olfaction does indeed enter into the construction of relations of 
power in our society, on both popular and institutional levels” (161).
Howes examines these issues more broadly across all of the senses (not just 
smell) in his 2003 text, Sensual Relations: Engaging the Senses in Culture and 
Social Theory, and, more recently, Classen authored The Book of Touch (2005). 
Both texts continue to explore how beliefs about the senses impact a number of 
social and political structures and practices. Shortly thereafter in 2006, Howes 
and Michael Bull launched the academic journal The Senses and Society to pro­
mote the dissemination of work in sensory studies. Another text of note that 
engages in sensory theory from a variety of fields is Empire of the Senses: The 
Sensual Culture Reader (2005), which contains pieces by twenty-two different 
scholars. Significantly, only one of these chapters is devoted to a study of the 
senses in literature: Victor Carl Friesens essay “A Tonic of Wildness: Sensuous­
ness in Henry David Thoreau.” The lack of literary analysis in a study that is 
otherwise thoroughly interdisciplinary is echoed in its bibliographical appen­
dix, which is entitled “Fifty Ways to Come to Your Senses,” and is a list of books 
that the editor describes as “a cross-section of current sensory research in the 
humanities, social sciences, and the arts” (404). Unfortunately, however, only 
three of the fifty entries appear to be focused on literature or literary analysis, 
which points to a pressing need for literary scholars to engage further in this 
field. Finally, and most recently, much of this work has culminated in an inter­
 56 Laura Davis A Sensory Studies Approach to Nine Faulkner Texts
disciplinary project uniting the primary voices in the field of sensory studies in 
a project of vast scope—Classens six-volume series, A Cultural History of the 
Senses, which was published at the end of 2014 and traces cultural beliefs about 
the senses from antiquity to the present day.1
Clearly, even from this brief list, the interdisciplinary field of sensory stud­
ies is burgeoning, but literary scholars continue to be rather underrepresented 
compared to other disciplines. As mentioned previously, there are of course 
key differences between fields like anthropology and that of literary studies, 
which may explain this disciplinary gap, so it is logical to ask before begin­
ning such an endeavor if it is even possible or wise to apply sensory studies 
to a field that is mediated by written language versus primary observations of 
human behavior. Sensory historian Mark Smith provides a significant answer 
to this question by mentioning the importance of the written word when he 
explores the “perils and prospects” of sensory history in a recent article entitled 
“Producing Sense, Consuming Sense, Making Sense: Perils and Prospects for 
Sensory History.” In fact, he overtly states that, ironically, some of the most 
important sources for sensory historians to explore are print sources. Although 
Smith is referencing historical print documents such as court records and let­
ters, his argument can apply to fiction as well. Though fieldwork or other forms 
of media might seem more important for exploring the senses, (such as aural 
historians listening to the recordings of slave songs) Smith points out that there 
is an important difference between producing something for the senses and 
consuming something for the senses. While it may be true that we can repro­
duce sound in the same form it was “heard” seventy years ago, arguably we 
cannot consume it (hear it) with our modern ears the same way because the 
social context has changed. As Smith writes, the consumption of the sound is 
“hostage to the context in which it was produced” (841). Thus, he asserts that 
in order to truly understand what people originally heard (or smelled for that 
matter), we are still reliant on their written descriptions rather than our own 
senses, and in order to understand how the senses functioned in a social con­
text, we need to read the words of those who were actually living at the time.
This point is crucial to consider when questioning whether sensory studies 
can be a useful methodological approach to studying literature. By Smiths own 
argument, examining writing can be a rich source to add to our understand­
ing of the social meanings attached to various senses in the past. Faulkner did 
indeed represent considerable non-visual sensory material in his characteriza­
tion, frequently describing what characters are smelling, hearing, tasting, and 
touching. Paying attention to these actions and seeking to understand patterns 
in how his characters use their senses may give us information about the cul­
'This is not a comprehensive list of sensory scholarship. Readers interested in learning more might be­
gin by visiting www.sensorystudies.org, which is a veritable hub of information on the field. Additionally, for a 
piece published even earlier than the foundational works often cited by sensory scholars, readers of Faulkner 
might find 1972’s “The Sociology of Odors,” by Gale Peter Largey and David Rodney Watson especially 
illuminating since it queries what the social beliefs about smells were within 10 years of Faulkners death.
 The Faulkner Journal Fall 2014 57
tural and sensory beliefs held by both the characters themselves and by the 
societies and historical periods Faulkner strove to represent. Indeed, as Smith 
warns, though the senses can be crucial for showing how people “understood 
their worlds and why,” we must always be “very careful not to assume that 
the senses are some sort of ‘natural’ endowment, unchangeable and constant” 
(“Producing” 842). One way to at least partially overcome this difficulty is to 
study how people defined and sensed categories such as gender or race differ­
ently in the past by reading non-fiction and fiction texts produced in different 
eras and carefully noting how cultural beliefs involving the use of the senses 
have or have not changed over time.
Smith, in his book How Race is Made: Slavery, Segregation, and the Senses, 
makes particular use of this strategy by examining a trove of letters and other 
print documents that express the sensory beliefs white people had about black 
people in a variety of eras. For example, Smith describes the prevailing belief in 
the South that some black senses were more acute than those of whites; because 
blacks were believed by many whites to be more animal than human, in the 
white imagination, they were imbued with extraordinary senses of smell and 
hearing, such as those dogs were observed to have (46). Additionally, Smith 
explores the longstanding conviction held by southern whites that black people 
smelled different from whites and that this smell was horrible and innate (not 
emanating just from their poverty, diet, or living and working conditions). He 
states that this belief was so entrenched among whites of all classes that it was 
taken as unquestioned fact to an extreme that can hardly be believed by people 
today unless one notes the pervasiveness of the references to black smell in the 
variety of written historical documents that Smith examines (26).
Comprehending the intensity of the belief that the smell of black skin 
could cause nausea, intense discomfort, and disease to white people is foreign 
and shocking to many people now, but Smith’s work is an important reminder 
of what sensory studies can and frequently do reveal—that sometimes be­
ing socially acceptable means not just being seen a certain way, but also be­
ing smelled, heard, touched, and perhaps even tasted a certain way, especially 
if one wants to be coded as a member of the dominant or acceptable group of 
one’s era. Knowing Smith’s work on race and smell in the South is important 
when querying how characters use and interpret their senses in Faulkner in 
terms of gender. For example, if, as Smith and other historians have argued, 
the dominant white racial group used codes of smell in order to judge, repress, 
and distinguish themselves from the dominated black race, can we find in­
stances where beliefs about gender or sexual norms function in similar ways in 
Faulkner’s fiction? Do Faulkner’s male and female characters interpret gender 
power structures in part by sniffing them out? Does Faulkner consistently as­
sign or deny particular smells (or the power to smell) to certain characters 
based on their gender or on their sexual choices? What are the meanings vari­
ous characters give to the smells they perceive as emanating from the bodies
 58 Laura Davis A Sensory Studies Approach to Nine Faulkner Texts
of others? More importantly, if these behavioral codes of the senses do exist in 
Faulkners fiction, how and when do we recognize disruptions to this code as 
various characters attempt to use it subversively? The rest of this article seeks to 
answer these questions, at least in part, from specific examples from Faulkner’s 
work, which might point to future work that could be done to study sensory 
patterns further across the Faulkner canon.
II. Smelly Gender Boundaries and Sexual Taboo Breakers
“She’s just like a dog! Soon as she passes anything in long pants 
she begins to give off something. You can smell it! You can smell 
it ten feet away!”
—Jody Varner, speaking of Eula (The Hamlet 110)
Gender and sexual mores are social power structures productively examined 
by Faulkner critics. As with the concept of race, critical explorations of gender 
in Faulkner’s fiction are quite prevalent and extensive. In their introduction to 
Haunted Bodies: Gender and Southern Texts, Susan V. Donaldson and Anne 
Goodwyn Jones write that “southern sexuality has long been haunted by stories 
designating hierarchical relationships among race, class, and gender” (1). Don­
aldson and Jones also assert that “such stories may have appeared all the more 
reassuring in a region where manhood and womanhood seemed so difficult 
to control” (6). Another source of criticism centering on gender in Faulkner’s 
work is found in William Faulkner: Six Decades of Criticism, edited by Linda 
Wagner-Martin, which contains an entire section entitled “Feminist, Woman- 
Centered, and Sexualized Approaches.” This collection is of particular interest 
to a sensory studies approach because it contains Christina Jarvis’s exploration 
of Faulkner’s female characters and food, which points subtly toward a sen­
sory approach that could be extended further to incorporate the sense of taste 
overtly.2
Jarvis’s work notwithstanding, to date, there seem to be very few published 
texts that engage with Faulkner, gender, and the non-visual senses, querying 
how both women and men enact and navigate gender norms by interpretive 
actions of smelling, sounding, hearing, touching, and tasting. It is important 
that critics begin to ask whether Faulkner’s male and female characters inter­
pret gender power structures in part through their non-visual senses. To do so,
2 This brief mention of sex and gender criticism in Faulkner is not meant to be comprehensive but to 
establish that there has been a significant scholarly conversation regarding gender and the works of Faulkner 
for many years and that while some of the most recent criticism comes tantalizingly close to querying gender 
and the nonvisual senses (such as Jarvis’s work), a more thorough consideration of gender and the nonvi­
sual senses is needed. For those interested in other voices exploring gender and Faulkner’s work, another 
good starting point is Minrose Gwin’s The Feminine and Faulkner, as well as Faulkner and Gender, edited 
by Donald M. Kartiganer. Additionally, Diane Roberts’s Faulkner and Southern Womanhood is helpful in 
understanding the various “types” of women in Faulkner’s texts, and there are, of course, important others 
that space alone (rather than significance and quality) precludes referencing here but which influenced this 
piece.
 The Faulkner Journal Fall 2014 59
it is necessary to trace instances of sensory gendering through a close reading 
of Faulkner’s texts in order to explore gendered conversations and judgments 
that might otherwise go unnoted.
As in any fictional or non-fictional society, a variety of both written and 
unspoken rules maintain the social order in Faulkners depiction of the South. 
His characters navigate a veritable minefield of taboos and traditions, and such 
rules, of course, must be enforceable in order to have power. We might expect 
that, for trespassers of law and custom to be punished, they must be caught by 
someone who sees them commit the transgression. However, Faulkners fic­
tional society goes further than this. It is not necessary to see someone do­
ing something wrong; on the contrary, in Faulkners world, transgressions of 
the moral code apparently ooze from pores in the form of odors that other 
characters’ noses seem naturally equipped to detect. Thus, eyewitnesses are not 
required to condemn characters that break the moral code. In Faulkner’s land­
scape, the nose just knows if someone has done something bad.
One transgression Faulkner frequently explores is the flouting of sexu­
al mores.3 Accordingly, he often writes that community members who meet 
characters who transgress against the accepted rules of heterosexual behavior 
seem able to smell sexual deviance even when they have no first-hand visual 
knowledge that any sexual impropriety has happened. The idea that one’s deep­
est sexual secrets can be betrayed obviously and easily by one’s body to com­
plete strangers’ noses has the effect of making these boundaries seem reified 
and unassailable and helps to explain why Faulkner’s characters sometimes 
approach public interaction with terror and dread. Other characters who 
eventually become pregnant out of wedlock or break social taboos of sexual 
propriety seem to exude so much tainted scent that their very environments 
retain a smell (ominously, occasionally this even happens before they even 
break the taboos). For example, in Absalom, Absalom!, the octoroon, whose 
relationship with Charles Bon is deemed sexually taboo by many of the other 
characters, has a house that is “cloyed” and “scented” and, most important­
ly, her room itself is described as “impregnated” with smell (158-59). Harry 
Wilbourne and Charlotte Rittenmeyer experience a similar exposure in If I 
Forget Thee, Jerusalem. When Wilbourne first approaches the home of Char­
lotte (who will later become pregnant in their adulterous relationship), he im­
mediately notices that the air outside of her dwelling is also “impregnated” 
with smell (31). Likewise, the dietician who works in the orphanage where 
Joe Christmas lives as a child sleeps with a doctor out of wedlock in Light in 
August; later, Doc Hines describes the couple as having “the reek of pollution 
on them” (384) and says that the dietician’s “lustful” bed is “still astink with sin 
and fear” (385).
3For the purpose of this essay, the sexual impropriety I am discussing concerns rules of heterosexual 
behavior that are being broken as men and women navigate gender roles while in sexual relationships with 
one another. The sensory coding of the breaking of homosexual taboos is wide enough in scope in its own 
right that I am treating it separately in another project.
 60 Laura Davis A Sensory Studies Approach to Nine Faulkner Texts
Furthermore, in Faulkner’s texts, it is not only possible for one’s sexual 
improprieties to become public by the sinful smell one is giving off but also by 
one’s sudden lack of a certain smell. For example, in the famous scene when 
Caddy Compson loses her virginity, her brother Benjy, who seems to have 
especially acute senses, knows immediately through his nose, not his eyes, that 
she has experienced a profound shift in sexual identity. He wails because Cad­
dy no longer smells like trees (SF 40). This is a very odd statement considering 
that Caddy has just emerged from the outdoors and ostensibly meets her lover 
in the woods among the trees. And yet, her body is an open secret to the power 
of a nose that can apparently sniff out a change in her identity as her sexuality 
moves from a pretransgressive to posttransgressive state.
In addition to the loss of virginity or pregnancy outside of marriage, people 
who break their marriage vows are also plagued with clouds of odor through­
out Faulkner’s fiction. In the opening scenes of If I Forget Thee, Jerusalem, Wil- 
bourne and Charlotte arrive in a small coastal town and fraudulently present 
themselves as man and wife. The first person they meet, a real estate agent who 
knows nothing about them and who has never seen them before, immediately 
declares that they are not married at all. Surprisingly, the man claims that he 
knows this because he can smell it. “Because I can smell a husband,” he says, 
continuing “Show me a woman I never saw before on the streets of Mobile or 
New Orleans either and I can smell whether—” (7). When the real estate agent 
conveys this olfactory “proof” to his friend, the doctor who rents a cabin to 
Wilbourne and Charlotte, the doctor, despite being a highly educated man, 
one whose education is focused on the study of the human body no less, seems 
to accept this “‘marriage sniffing’” as completely unremarkable and absolutely 
reliable evidence (10). Thus, the ability to smell sexual impropriety is accepted 
as a commonplace community belief and moral enforcement method.
Likewise, when Wilbourne and Charlotte first run away from her husband 
and board the train where they ultimately have extramarital sex for the first 
time, Wilbourne looks around the train and says he knew that the strangers 
aboard could already smell his and Charlotte’s “unsanctity and disaster” even 
before they had consummated their affair (JER 51). Doc Hines makes similar 
comments about his daughter (who is also sleeping with a man who is not 
her husband), asserting that he knew about her sexual sinfulness even before 
he had “proof” because she was “already stinking in God’s sight” (LA 374), 
an interesting description that oddly mingles two senses; is this a God so all­
knowing that he can even smell with his eyes, mingling the power of multiple 
senses? Gavin Stevens also ties sexual transgression to a smell when he cautions 
Eula Snopes about her adulterous affair, warning that if she runs away with her 
lover, Eula’s daughter Linda will be left “here in all the stink” that will arise from 
the scandal (T 289). Finally, when Hightower’s wife continually visits Memphis 
to commit adultery in Light in August, we are told that though the town never 
puts into words the sinful things she was doing, it did not forget either because
 The Faulkner Journal Fall 2014 61
the good women in the town have “plenty of time to smell out sin” like the 
sin being committed by Mrs Hightower (66). While some of these comments 
are more linguistically metaphorical and some are examples of characters ac­
tively using their noses to sniff out infidelity, it is intriguing how frequently 
both these turns of speech and these actions of smelling involve connecting the 
sense of smell with sexual misconduct.
The commonality of all of these cross-textual examples is that Faulkners 
characters consistently express the belief that the nose is as least as reliable as 
the eye when it comes to identifying and condemning those who break sexual 
taboos of promiscuity and infidelity; indeed at times, to many characters, the 
sense of smell seems to be even more reliable than sight since the nose can 
detect invisible odors that linger before and beyond an actual sexually improp­
er event that the eye could have observed. Another potential explanation for 
this connection between the sense of smell and sexual transgression is that, 
as many sensory scholars have pointed out, there is a “Western hierarchy” of 
the senses that privileges sight as the lofty and rational sense and the other 
senses, like smell, as lower and more bodily (Howes, “Craft”). Such a hierarchy 
might explain in part why something like extramarital sex, which the morals of 
the era would have defined as bodily, degrading, and low would be connected 
with the sense of smell rather than sight. Whatever the reason, this gender and 
sexual norming clearly becomes a whole-body affair for many characters in 
Faulkner, where the non-visual sense of smell is crucial for understanding the 
moral customs and values of the society and how offenders are both caught 
and punished in ways that modern readers might find surprising since the idea 
of smelling infidelity (particularly before it even happens) seems no longer a 
commonplace belief. Thus, once again, Faulkner s fiction is consistent with the 
predictions of many sensory scholars who warn that all of the senses, including 
the sense of smell, are powerful tools for a society to maintain community rules 
and boundaries of conduct that pertain to each era.
III. Smelly Men/Smelly Women
In addition to sexual taboos, Faulkners depiction of his society and region is 
also rife with gender laws as well. There are strict codes of behavior for both 
men and women, and this acceptable masculinity and femininity becomes 
inscribed onto bodies through the bodily production of smells. Performance 
of proper masculinity and femininity in Faulkners novels consists of exuding 
not just the right behavior but also the right odors. And, as with the examples 
above, when slips are made in this gender performativity, other noses can im­
mediately sense the flaw; they also impose judgment and attempt to reassert 
the proper order without visual evidence, and this reveals much about peoples 
places in the gendered hierarchy.
 62 Laura Davis A Sensory Studies Approach to Nine Faulkner Texts
One of the most pronounced indications that gender has a distinct odor in 
Faulkner’s landscape occurs in Light in August. When the young Joe Christmas 
is carried out of the orphanage in the middle of the night, Faulkner writes that 
Joe knew “by smell that the person who carried him was a man” (135). Interest­
ingly, this one simple line carries no further explanation or proof; it is as if the 
trio of Faulkner, his readers, and his characters are all supposed to accept this 
claim of “smell-able” gender as obvious and unremarkable. The message seems 
to be that even unschooled children can understand innate bodily markers of 
gender identity through the sense of smell alone.4 Not only do male bodies 
carry this “man-smell,” but dwellings that are primarily male domains also be­
come encoded with man-smell in a similar fashion to the ways that white char­
acters frequently attribute a “black smell” to black homes in Faulkners texts.5 
For example, in The Hamlet, the store where the men spend their time together 
each day has a stove that “radiated the strong good heat which had an actual 
smell, masculine, almost monastic—a winter’s concentration of unwomaned 
and deliberate tobacco-spittle” (137).
Apparently, just like “man,” “woman” is a smell that can be identified as 
well. For instance, in Light in August, when Joe hides in the dietician’s closet, 
the closet is described as “womansmelling” (121) and later as “rife, pinkwom­
ansmelling” (122). The janitor makes a similar comment about the woman’s 
room saying that it was “warm, littered, womanpinksmelling” (132). Further­
more, when Joe gets older, he is instructed by his teenage friends on the topic 
of sex and of women’s bodies. The narrator asserts that if the boy talking about 
women’s bodies had only described feminine bodies and cycles as a “mental 
state, something which he only believed” that the other boys would not have 
believed him (185). But, when the boy draws a picture that reveals women are 
“to be discerned by the sense of smell” (185), the other boys immediately ac­
cept his story as truth. Finally, in Go Down, Moses, when Gavin Stevens goes 
to visit Miss Worsham, an older, unmarried woman, we are told that the bed­
room smells to Stevens like the “unmistakable faint odor of old maidens” (361). 
Thus, women’s gender, just like the man who carries Joe out of the orphanage, 
is also fixed by smell—gendered smell that can be consumed and identified as 
unquestionable truth by others.
Importantly, the way white male characters in Faulkner smell to one an­
other (and the smells they are able to discern on others), often reassert ele­
ments of masculinity that maintain male power, violence, and virility. For in­
'Fascinatingly, recent empirical studies show there is some truth to the idea that humans can smell 
gender and, correspondingly, that the ways in which we smell gender indicate our sexual orientation. See, 
for example, a well-publicized 2014 study by Wen Zhou and collaborators published in Current Biology, 
which measured participants’ ability to assign gender to someone via the smell of male or female hormones. 
The fact that Faulkner and his characters seem well aware of a fact that is considered cutting-edge scientific 
research in 2014 is intriguing to say the least.
5 Although gender and race are often complicit and intermingled, and I include a few mentions of race 
here, due to the breadth of each category, I am primarily treating a sensory studies approach to smell and 
racial hierarchies in Faulkners work in a separate project.
 The Faulkner Journal Fall 2014 63
stance, we are told six times in Absalom, Absalom! that Mr Compson smells like 
cigars, a product that was a particularly masculine domain, often consumed 
away from the company of women (23, 71, 141, 147-48, 168, 301). Likewise, 
Thomas Sutpens father is said to smell like strong alcohol, another product 
more aligned with the freedoms that were given to men but that were not as ac­
ceptable for women (187). Men also frequently smell like the all-male environs 
that they inhabit even when they are away from these habitats. For example, 
despite the fact that he meets them in a restaurant, Joe says that the group of 
men who hang around the diner where his lover works all have the “odor of 
barbershops” (LA 178).
Additionally, smells that are associated with violence, toughness, and vi­
rility almost always linger around male characters rather than female, which 
sends a message that only men possess these qualities. Bayard Sartoris notes 
the smell of war on his father in the opening pages of The Unvanquished (10), 
and when Bayard discovers that Granny has been shot by a man, this scene of 
uncontrolled male violence (which Granny had asserted incorrectly could be 
controlled through her gender, i.e., the fact she was a white woman), smells 
overwhelmingly like gunpowder to the young boy. And, lest we note this as a 
“factual” smell alone, something that Bayard encounters simply because a gun 
has been discharged nearby, mens affinity for smelling violence seems to be 
much more complicated than this in other sections of Faulkner’s texts. For ex­
ample, Quentin and Shreve say they can smell the powder and violence of the 
Civil War even from their perspective a generation into the future (AA 280). 
That this is a distinctly male scent mingled with violence is clear when Bayard 
faces down the man who killed Granny. Right before Bayard murders Grumby, 
he says he smells sweat and explains that he can distinctly tell from the sweat 
that Grumby is the villain and that he is male (U 183), and then he shoots him. 
Thus, once again, even a very young boy is given the power to detect both 
criminality and gender identity from a smell and then enacts punishment on 
the man who broke a gender taboo by killing a white woman. Forget due pro­
cess or a court of law: apparently a nose is enough.
Several other examples of this trend include Doc Hines, whom we are told 
has “that quality of outworn violence like a scent, an odor” even after he is old 
and fairly feeble (LA 343), and likewise, Mr McEachern, another man who 
frequently displays violence, is said to smell like “an odor of clean hard virile 
living leather” (LA 149), a description where masculinity is again connected 
with virility, toughness, and even “clean” morality. The idea of male sexual con­
quest and virility being interpreted through smell also holds true in The Town, 
where the three young men who are suspected of fathering Eula Varner’s baby 
are described as the ones who “ran from the smell of Will Varner’s shotgun” 
(6). Disturbingly, in this sensory system, young boys, who have not committed 
violence themselves, can apparently also smell violence even before they know 
what it is: when Linda’s boyfriend beats her up for having dinner with Gavin
 64 Laura Davis A Sensory Studies Approach to Nine Faulkner Texts
at the Mallison house, Chick Mallison sees her shortly thereafter; although he 
does not see the violence occur and should have no idea that it has happened, 
he says of the scene, “[I]t was like I had smelled something, caught a whiff 
of something for a second that even if I located it again I still wouldn’t know 
whether I had ever smelled it before or not” (T 163). Therefore, even though 
Chick is not yet old enough (man enough?) to identify the smell as violence, 
he still detects it.
All of these examples vary widely from a linguistic standpoint; as with 
earlier examples that utilized metaphorical speech, some of these smelly refer­
ences are similes, while others, like the Bayard example, indicate the nose as 
leading to an action, and the example of Chick is a simile that nonetheless also 
references the overt action of actually smelling something. While a sensory 
studies approach might perhaps privilege how characters are physically using 
their senses as more significant than metaphors and similes, even the examples 
that are figures of speech still seem noteworthy for just how frequently they 
occur and how consistent they are in the ideas or beliefs they represent. In 
other words, while it is important to distinguish when the author or the char­
acters are being metaphorical versus when they are actually using their senses 
of smell, it is also hard to escape just how many times these metaphors and 
similes circle around the trope of smell or stench.
Not only can Faulkners men smell each other and the violence that they 
sometimes commit, they are often given the power to smell women too (a 
power, as we will see below, that women rarely get in return). Importantly, 
once again the scenes of men smelling women also have to do with the “ap­
propriately” masculine values of toughness, violence, or virility. In As I Lay 
Dying, when the Bundren family makes it to town with their mother’s corpse 
days after she has died, the narrator tells us that while the women nearby were 
“scattering up and down the street with handkerchiefs to their noses,” that “a 
crowd of hard-nosed men and boys” remain and are tough enough to stand 
around the reeking wagon (203). Likewise, when Joe Christmas is about to 
sleep with a woman, he says that he can “smell her” and “smell the waiting” 
for him to be the sexual or physical aggressor. He also asserts that he can smell 
that she is either waiting for him to initiate their sexual liaison or waiting for 
him to hit her as if the two things (sex and violence) are one and the same to 
his nose (LA 187). In another scene, the narrator tells us that Joe can smell the 
“damp,” “dark,” and “fecund earth” as if he can even smell out the feminine in 
the physical world around him (229). And, even when men do not want to 
smell women, they can use their nose as an escape. Joe, who is confused by 
his relationship with Joanna, wanders instinctively toward the barn one night 
when he wants to flee from his thoughts of her. We are told, “He was thinking 
now, aloud now, ‘Why in hell do I want to smell horses?’ Then he said, fum­
bling: ‘It’s because they are not women. Even a mare horse is a kind of man’” 
(109).
 The Faulkner Journal Fall 2014 65
In addition to the ability to smell women and to smell violence, male noses 
(particularly white male noses) demonstrate their supremacy through the pow­
er of smelly judgment over other social institutions, systems, and morals. As 
mentioned above, in If I Forget Thee, Jerusalem, it is a man who says he can smell 
the adultery between Charlotte and Wilbourne and who first censures them for 
their behavior, so his nose is clearly one that can police morality and rules. In 
the same novel, the doctor who rents his home to the couple also claims that he 
can tell the time of day by “the staling smell of gumbo” (4-5). In the Faulkneri­
an landscape, where characters often experience a great deal of confusion and 
anxiety over the ability to understand and control time, such acute knowledge 
of time is a real power indeed. Likewise, Benjy Compson even has the power 
to smell death almost the moment that it happens (SF 34). Bayard, as a male of 
the dominant race, is able to smell black people and thus identify them as black 
even without seeing them (U 83, 96,102-03), and Joe Christmas, who may be at 
least partially if not wholly white, can do the same thing (LA 331). Bayard also 
says that the Yankee men, once they are the dominant power in the region at 
the end of the war, have the ability to smell members of the subjugated Sarto- 
ris family and by doing so, to cause them disaster (U 104). Furthermore, both 
Benjy and Wilbourne are able to smell changes in the weather (SF 64; JER 99). 
Clearly, from these examples there is gendered power in having the right (male) 
nose, which gives men the ability to smell and interpret laws of time, the natural 
world, death, and morality and to then be able to reassert control over others 
who do not seem to have the same masculine olfactory powers.
That men’s hegemony and strength is intimately tied to their sense of smell 
(both their ability to smell others and their ability to smell a certain way them­
selves) is especially notable when studying male characters in Faulkners texts 
who have broken or failed to live up to the code of masculinity in some way. 
Fascinatingly, these “failed” men seem to lose not just respect but to lose their 
power of smell as well. Bayard remarks on this in The Unvanquished when he 
goes to confront Redmond, the man who killed his father. Tellingly, when Ba­
yard walks into Redmond’s office to duel, his first thoughts center on the lack of 
smell, much like Benjy’s reaction to Caddy. Bayard is intensely puzzled that he 
cannot even smell tobacco though he knew that Redmond was a smoker (248). 
This moment is especially important when we note that previously, Bayard’s 
father had taunted Redmond’s lack of courage, violence, and virility by saying 
that he was a failure at warfare, never “having smelled powder” (225). Thus, 
Redmond, portrayed as a southern man who has failed at the “manly” pursuits 
of running a business, fighting in a war, and successfully defending himself in 
a duel, both loses his own ability to smell (he wasn’t able to partake in smell­
ing the powder of war with other men) and his own personal scent. (Even the 
manly smell of tobacco smoke in a small room refuses to cling to him or his 
surroundings, which is rather extraordinary given the typically pungent and 
pervasive nature of smoke in small spaces.)
 66 Laura Davis A Sensory Studies Approach to Nine Faulkner Texts
A similar situation happens to Gavin Stevens in The Town. Throughout 
the novel, Gavin fails at traditional Southern manhood in several ways. First, 
he fails at violence because he gets beaten up twice by other men (66, 167). 
Secondly, he fails at virility because although he yearns sexually for Eula and 
later her daughter Linda, he never consummates either relationship though 
he has the opportunity to do so with both women. Finally, Gavin also fails at 
courage; when he turns down Eulas offer of her body, she says to him, “Why 
are you afraid?” (84). Interestingly, Eula is also the person who first notes that 
something is wrong with Gavins ability to smell like a man. Though as explored 
above, tobacco is usually a smell associated with men, when Gavin walks into 
his office and finds her waiting, it is Eula who smells like it as she sits smok­
ing in his office, not Gavin. He says, “And I know now that I already smelled 
tobacco smoke even before I put my hand on what I thought was an unlocked 
door . . . smelling the tobacco while I still tried to turn the knob” (280). Not 
only does Eula appropriate this masculine smell, she then pointedly remarks 
on the fact that Gavin does not smell like tobacco and perhaps does not even 
use it despite his insistence on carrying a pipe: “‘There’s your cob pipe,’ she said. 
They were in the brass bowl beside the tobacco jar. ‘You’ve got three of them. 
I’ve never seen you smoke one. When do you smoke them?”’ (281). Thus, Gavin 
not only fails to perform sexually like a man, he also fails to smell like a man 
via his phallic unlit pipe.
Masculine scents continue to fade from Gavin even after Eula’s death. 
Ratliff goes into Gavin’s office and opens the drawer where Gavin usually keeps 
liquor (another male-smelling, male-coded product). Puzzlingly, even though 
Ratliff knows that there was just liquor in the drawer and always has been, he 
says it suddenly “never even smelled like he used to keep whiskey in it” (310). 
Not only will the smell of liquor and tobacco not cling to Gavin even in places 
where he used to store these items, now that Eula has emasculated him by 
pointing out his failure with his pipe/penis he won’t touch or taste the liquor 
that Ratliff pours him, which alludes to issues with his other senses (314). In 
the same scene, Ratliff notices that Gavin once again tries to smoke his (man- 
smelly) pipe; he even lights the match, but then blows it out carefully without 
putting it to the pipe and then sets the pipe down unused (314) leaving him 
once again without an important odor of masculinity.
Other male characters in Faulkner also encounter analogous disruptive 
issues with smell and manhood when they fail in their masculinity by becom­
ing too aligned with the feminine and/or the domestic sphere. For example, in 
If I Forget Thee, Jerusalem, when Wilbourne decides to write romantic fiction 
by pretending to be a woman author voicing female concerns, he notices that 
smells start to bother him so much that he can no longer sleep. He has to stay up 
and rid himself of the smell of the pulp by smoking (again, a masculine-coded 
smell) before he can go to bed (103, 107). Apparently, it is only a masculine 
smell like tobacco smoke that can rid Wilbourne of the anxiety and insomnia
 The Faulkner Journal Fall 2014 67
that comes from doing something so dangerous to his masculinity as pretend­
ing to be a woman. Additionally, during this same time period, Wilbourne be­
comes acutely bothered by smells of domesticity, such as the smell of children, 
children’s food, and diapers that he imagines he can smell coming from the 
park below his window while he writes (113-14). In these smells of feminine 
domesticity, he worries that he is beginning to smell the “dead corpse” of love 
(118). In becoming too feminine, Wilbourne, like Redmond, risks losing his 
masculinity, and his first warning sign of this comes through his nose. Another 
similar moment where a man begins to smell oddly due to becoming too femi­
nine occurs in The Hamlet, when Ratliff barges in on a member of the Snopes 
family (a man who is a teacher, a job that is perhaps a bit gender disruptive 
since in Faulkners works it is sometimes an occupation held by women too) 
and catches the man unawares. Ratliff says of the room, “[T]he odor of it was 
not a bachelor-uncle smell but was curiously enough that of a closet in which a 
middleaged widow kept her clothes” (220-21). Thus, once again, we encounter 
situations in Faulkner where identity categories such as gender function not 
through the visual alone, but through the use of the sense of smell and where 
characters who are experiencing “gender trouble” in their ability to perform 
masculinity are revealed through the way they smell (or fail to smell) to others.
Clearly, via the way that male characters actively use their sense of smell or 
the ways that similes and metaphors link them to certain smells, in Faulkner’s 
works there are often consistent connections between olfactory prowess and 
properly performed masculinity, which certainly begs the question whether 
the same holds true for the female characters as well. Does a close reading also 
reveal links between performing socially acceptable femininity and particu­
lar scents or olfactory actions? Interestingly, in these nine works, the answer 
turns out to be that the olfactory commonality with women is not what they 
smell, but rather that it is surprisingly rare for them to be depicted as smelling 
anything at all. One instance where this becomes clear is around the subject of 
food. Over the course of the novels examined, men of a variety of races, socio­
economic classes, and ages frequently express their physical hunger and refer­
ence their ability to smell food. For example, a brief list of white men who are 
depicted as smelling food include Roth Edmonds and Henry Beauchamp, who 
can smell chicken that Mollie is cooking (GDM 110); the doctor in If I Forget 
Thee, Jerusalem, who smells gumbo (5); Ratliff, who can “smell food cooking in 
the kitchen behind him” in The Hamlet (92); the townsmen in The Hamlet, who 
twice walk “through the hot vivid smell of ham” from Mrs Littlejohn’s kitchen 
(329, 331); and Isaac McCaslin, who can smell “frying meat” (GDM 218) and 
“cheese and salt meat” (GDM 244). Likewise, the prisoners smell food in If I 
Forget Thee, Jerusalem (58) and so does Mink Snopes when he is in jail in The 
Hamlet (285). The young boy Bayard smells food in The Unvanquished (129), 
and Eck Snopes can smell food when he cooks in the restaurant in The Town 
(30). The same frequently holds true for black or mixed-race male characters.
 68 Laura Davis A Sensory Studies Approach to Nine Faulkner Texts
When Lucas Beauchamp returns home after going to the courthouse, the nar­
rator says, “Now he could smell the cooking meat” (GDM 66), and later, he 
smells “molasses and cheese” when he goes to visit Edmonds (GDM 93).
In contrast, female characters, despite being depicted in kitchens much 
more than the male characters, are much less likely to be described as smelling 
food. In fact, when it comes to smell, Faulkner’s male characters often portray 
women not as beings who often smell or taste food but as consumable beings 
who smell and taste like food. For example, the first time that Wilbourne visits 
Charlottes home in If I Forget Thee, Jerusalem, as he turns to her house and 
stands on the threshold, he says that from behind the door he is assailed with 
the strong scent of sugar, bananas, jasmine, and hemp, which are all products 
that have been used as sources of food (31). Additionally, sugar, bananas, and 
jasmine are interesting scents for Charlotte to be encoded with since they speak 
(reek?) of the foreign and the exotic, something mysterious or alluring. Hemp, 
on the other hand, in addition to being used as food, has also been used as a 
drug or to make rope. Thus, Charlotte, who later will express her desire to artis­
tically explore “The Bad Smell,” is initially scent-coded as food. She smells like 
something to be eaten by Wilbourne, a food that is different, enticing, but that 
can also be dangerously intoxicating or something that might cause Wilbourne 
to be tied down or bound.
Later, after he has slept with her, Wilbourne also says that Charlotte smells 
like bacon (JER 90), which comes from an animal primarily kept for human 
consumption. By describing Charlotte as scented like exotic food and spices 
from colonized regions or scented like a tamed, domesticated animal, despite 
claiming to love Charlotte’s independence, daring, and liberated attitude, Wil- 
bourne’s nose seems to insist on identifying her as something quite different 
than what he professes to value about her. In fact, Wilbourne seems to associate 
Charlotte’s identity so strongly with these smells that after she dies and he is in 
prison, anytime he smells the nearby fluidity of the ocean (which, as Minrose 
Gwin points out in The Feminine and Faulkner is symbolic of the feminine), 
he also begins smelling jasmine (something from the colonies, feminine, and 
used in food) and hemp (symbolically binding him just like the prison he is in) 
almost obsessively as he thinks about Charlotte (248, 251, 254, 255, 257, 258, 
259, 266, 272). Thus, even after her death, Wilbourne consumes the memory of 
Charlotte like scented food through what he continually smells.
In Light in August, there are three other notable instances where men met­
aphorically consume women as food, either through the sense of smell or the 
related sense of taste. First, even when Joe is very young, he intuitively associ­
ates the dietician at the orphanage with eating. We are told, “The dietician was 
nothing to him yet, save a mechanical adjunct to eating, food, the dining room 
.. . except as something of pleasing association ... making his mouth think of 
something sweet and sticky to eat” (120). Second, when the unpopular Joanna 
Burden’s house burns, the narrator says that in the past people thought her
 The Faulkner Journal Fall 2014 69
house should be burned “with a little human fat meat to start it good” (49). 
Here Joanna is something to be used up, eaten up by the fire just like meat. 
Third, when foe and his stepfather argue, Joe blames Mrs McEachern for mak­
ing his punishment worse: “both the man and the boy accepting it [punish­
ment] as a natural and inescapable fact until she, getting in the way, must give 
it an odor, an attenuation, an aftertaste” (167). In this instance, Mrs McEachern 
is positioned as consumable via two non-visual senses, as both a bad smell and 
a bad taste, when she interferes in what both Joe and Mr McEachern perceive 
as the business of men.
Likewise, in both The Hamlet and in The Town, Eula is frequently posi­
tioned as a food that men want to smell and taste. Her eyes are “like cloudy 
hothouse grapes” (H 11), and “her entire appearance suggested some symbol­
ogy out of the old Dionysic times - honey in sunlight and bursting grapes, the 
writhen bleeding of the crushed fecundated vine” (H 105). The narrator also 
states that Eula is “female meat” (H 111) and, more overtly, Eula’s suitors are 
described as having “swarmed like wasps about the ripe peach which her full 
damp mouth resembled” (H141). Ihus, even Eula’s mouth, which should be an 
apparatus through which she can taste food, instead becomes tasty, desirable 
food for the palates of the men around her. Later, Ratliff also thinks of Eula as 
“just meat, just galmeat” (H 166), and Gavin says that Eula is like a “blinding 
whiff,” so that her smell is so important that it literally seems to put out his eyes 
(T 283). Even Eula’s virginity is situated in terms of the sense of taste. When we 
are told that Eula already seems to know the time when she will lose her vir­
ginity, she is described as waiting for that moment as if she is waiting “for the 
eating to start” (H 143). Thus, the first man who has sex with her will literally 
not just look at her but will be feasting upon her as smelly, tasty food.
Women are also portrayed as smelling not just like regular food but also 
as dangerous, rotting, or rancid food in ways that position them as a sensory 
threat. In As I Lay Dying, Addies son Vardaman constantly confuses her with 
a fish he has caught, a food known for its strong odor, and Peabody complains 
when Dewey Dell doesn’t fix him the mother/fish to eat, saying that vegetables 
alone are “mighty spindling eating” for a man (60). Later, Addie is also de­
scribed as smelling like rotten cheese (203). This image of women as tasty food 
for men but also food that is stinking or that will spoil is perpetuated by the 
Bundren’s neighbor, Tull. In an extended passage, he reflects that his wife Cora 
is a jar of milk that he knows will eventually turn into smelly soured milk as 
she goes bad. But, he ponders, at least it is “your milk, sour or not, because you 
would rather have milk that will sour than to have milk that wont, because you 
are a man” (139; emphasis mine). Thus, again there is a linguistic linking of 
women to smelly food, contradictory food that men must consume in order to 
perform their masculinity but food that can also be dangerously spoiled and 
reeking. As such, from a sensory perspective, the men in the texts are por­
trayed as eerily similar to the vultures that constantly circle Addie’s odorous
 70 Laura Davis A Sensory Studies Approach to Nine Faulkner Texts
corpse trying to eat it throughout the narrative of As I Lay Dying; in fact, one 
of the vultures is described as an “old baldheaded man” (119). The convict in If 
I Forget Thee, Jerusalem responds similarly, describing his girlfriend in terms 
more indicative of a farm animal raised for consumption than a woman, saying 
she smelled sweaty like “soft young female flesh, slightly pneumatic,” a word 
that refers to the smell of a woman’s breast almost as if she were a chicken he 
wants to eat (286). Furthermore, in The Town, when the women in the Cotil­
lion Club wear corsages, Chick tells us their smell was like “mist in a swamp 
on a cold morning” (64), an interesting image for a perfumed and floral scene 
since swamps are frequently depicted as both wild and beautiful and as strong­
ly scented rotting places that are potentially dangerous.
This scented coding of women as spoiled or dangerous to men’s senses is 
also expressed through the linkage of odor with feminine sickness and death. 
For example, in As I Lay Dying, the smell of Addie’s corpse is literally declared 
a danger to public health (204). Additionally, the elderly and desiccated Miss 
Rosa in Absalom, Absalom! is well-known by her smells: she and/or her envi­
rons are frequently depicted as smelling dead, smelling like a coffin, or smelling 
like camphor (which was used to treat illness and also for embalming) (4, 143, 
290). Judith is also associated with the smell of camphor (AA 19). In If I Forget 
Thee, Jerusalem, Wilbourne says that Charlotte smells like balsam (90), which 
could be used as anointing oil in sacraments of illness and dying. Aunt Louisa 
of The Unvanquished overwhelms her environs with the smell of dead roses 
(201), and in The Town, Gavin also thinks of Eula as if she is deadly, like drown­
ing. He describes her as “just standing there facing me so that what I smelled 
was not even just woman but that terrible, that drowning envelopment” (84).
Thus, in Faulkner’s world of gender and the senses, the non-visual senses 
of smell and sometimes taste are connected with ideas about masculinity and 
femininity but in different ways. By the smelly rules of this social order, one 
way men are able to police and perform masculinity consistently in Faulkner’s 
fiction is by smelling each other. Furthermore, they frequently describe women 
in terms of how they smell and then, sometimes literally and sometimes figu­
ratively, they depict these feminine odors in contradictory tropes of tempting, 
tasty food but also of smelly spoilage or odorous death. Female characters, on 
the other hand, with the exception of a few notable examples discussed below, 
are far less likely to be depicted as smelling things or as interpreting the world 
through scent. This distinction between how the sexes are drawn could be read 
in a variety of ways, but one thing that does seem clear in these nine texts is that 
when it comes to smell, the male characters are most often described as having 
more olfactory agency. In other words, they are far more likely to be portrayed 
as actively smelling something, and women are far more likely to be described 
as smelling like something; thus, at least in the terms of the nose, the male 
characters seem cast more in the role of sensory actors who sniff things out and 
the women characters as subjects to be discerned in part through their scents.
 The Faulkner Journal Fall 2014 71
IV. Smelly Disruptions
Despite these generalizations, however, there are a few interesting disruptions 
to these gendered sensory patterns when Faulkner, or at the very least his char­
acters, seems to be playing with the constructed nature of gendered smells. In 
Absalom, Absalom!, the narrator writes that pigmentation (race) has no more 
“moral value” than scent (161). Such a statement implies that there might be 
moments in his fiction when race, gender, and the smells that code them and 
give them moral and social value can be exposed as arbitrary and constructed 
and thus be disrupted. Unfortunately, sometimes even when these subversive 
moments of sensory gender roles occur, the subversion often gets conflated 
and entangled with other forms of repression such as racism or socioeconomic 
class barriers. And yet, these are still important passages to note and inspect.
First, there are a few rare moments in Faulkner’s fiction where women 
themselves are able to smell things rather than be smelled by others. Without 
the framework of sensory studies, these brief scenes in Faulkner’s texts in which 
women smell things might easily be dismissed as fleeting moments of random 
background trivia unimportant to the plot or Faulkner’s craft. However, when 
Faulkner’s fiction is approached through sensory studies, such instances re­
sound with a great deal more meaning. Indeed, they can become small op­
portunities of (admittedly limited) liberation and disruption in a society that 
is otherwise strictly policed by the senses in ways that seek to control more 
typically subjugated groups like women and non-whites. Once again, this is 
where the frame of sensory studies can open up new meaning to passages of 
Faulkner’s fiction and helps us understand his society and characters in fresh 
ways.
Addie Bundren, for example, who is perhaps the smelliest woman in all 
of Faulkner’s novels, at one point gets to express her own sensory desires. As 
a young woman, she would run away from her job as a school teacher and es­
cape to a place where she tells the reader that she especially enjoyed the smell 
of damp and rotting leaves (AILD 169). Admittedly, it is pitiable that a female 
character who will spend virtually an entire novel being dead and smelling 
dead gravitates to the smell of dampness, rot, and decay; however, there is some 
autonomy here—at least in this one instance Addie herself is doing the smell­
ing, smelling for pleasure, no less, rather than being smelled.
In the same novel, Addies daughter Dewey Dell sniffs a bottle of medicine 
proffered to her by an unscrupulous pharmacy worker. On the positive side, 
Dewey Dell interprets the smell correctly: “Hit smells like turpentine,” she says, 
which is the conclusion that the young man has reached as well (247). Consid­
ering that camphor (which is mentioned previously as a scent of sickness and 
death) and turpentine are related compounds, the reader is given a brief mo­
ment of hope that Dewey Dell, whose nose has just proven itself to be as sharp 
and as knowing as that of her male counterpart, will escape his ruse unscathed.
 72 Laura Davis A Sensory Studies Approach to Nine Faulkner Texts
Unfortunately, although her sense of smell has interpreted the scene and the 
young man’s motives correctly, she still becomes a victim of his sexual trick­
ery and assault. Nevertheless, for one small moment, Dewey Dell is given the 
power to smell and interpret. Additionally, in Absalom, Absalom! we find the 
octoroon being handed a bottle of perfume to smell for her pleasure and com­
fort (158). This would seem especially important as she is a racial minority and 
lower in the social hierarchy; however, unfortunately it is another black person, 
a servant designated as a “negress,” who hands her the perfume, so even though 
this is somewhat liberating, there are clearly repressive class and racial systems 
working in this sensory moment as well. Lastly, in The Town, Aleck Sander says 
that his mother could “see and hear through a wall” (much like Dilsey, who also 
has the power to see through walls) and that when he got bigger, she could even 
“smell his breath over the telephone” (55). This ability for a woman to monitor 
a male via her senses is important; however, it too is somewhat circumscribed 
by the fact that Aleck and Gowan attribute these powers to Guster being a 
mother, saying these sensory tricks were something that perhaps all mothers 
(not all women) could do.
Furthermore, it must be noted that women as well as men smell Addie ‘s 
corpse throughout the text of As I Lay Dying. This instance in particular brings 
up the point of whether being smelled by another person is always an act of 
consumption and containment or whether being smelled can also be an act 
of assertion and power. Clearly, as explored above in regards to masculinity 
especially, when the smeller is in charge of defining moral and social standing 
in society by judging and interpreting other peoples bodies, this most often 
results in judgment and discipline for the person being smelled. However, giv­
ing off smell is also an action—an action that can have an impact on others; in 
this way, being odorous can also be a statement that is controlled by the person 
giving off the smell. For example, it is interesting that throughout the text of As 
I Lay Dying, women have a very unified reaction to Addies smell. Though men 
note the smell and discuss it, women in the community consistently call Ad­
dies smell “a outrage” (117,187). This is a compelling word considering that for 
most of her life, Addie has internalized her anger and unhappiness. With the 
stench of her body as a weapon, her rage finally turns out—“out raging” into 
the community. Addie’s body, through its odor, literally moves other bodies out 
of its way throughout the text, a power Addie did not seem to have in life. Com­
menting on the situation, one of Addie’s neighbors says, “a woman that’s been 
dead in a box four days, the best way to respect her is to get her into the ground 
as quick as you can” (116). On the flip side, a body that remains above ground 
like Addie’s fails to respect the community and begins to violate and uproot 
its religious, social, moral, and legal sensibilities. In this way, Addie’s smell be­
comes a powerful outward/outrage-ous force of challenge and assertion rather 
than a way in which she can be contained; it is, of course, unfortunate that she 
literally has to die to gain this power.
 The Faulkner Journal Fall 2014 73
In this aspect, Addie is like another of Faulkner’s characters who dies, 
Charlotte Rittenmeyer oilfJ Forget Thee, Jerusalem, who also seems more in 
control of smell than might typically be expected of a female. It is Charlotte, 
after all, as an artist engaged in active creation who makes an effigy of starva­
tion and deprivation entitled “the Bad Smell,” a statue she uses to make power­
ful forces like hunger (or possibly even masculinity?) more diminutive when 
she crafts the idea of bad smells into the body of a little old man she can easily 
contain within her hands (81, 89, 91, 155). Not only is she powerful enough to 
make the Bad Smell, she seems to play with the inter-related and overlapping 
aspects of the senses, naming something a smell that she makes through the 
sense of touch and that is clearly meant to be consumed visually versus via 
olfaction. Considering the other notable example of such inter-sensory min­
gling is a moment where God himself is described as experiencing something 
as smelling through his eyes, this inter-sensory control says a lot about Char­
lottes strength and efficacy at harnessing the power of the senses and likewise 
at flouting taboos that are connected to these senses. Like Addie, Charlotte 
reveals that she can use sensory control to make others do things when she 
demonstrates her ability to bestow the Bad Smell onto others, such as the man 
who visits her and Wilbourne, saying flippantly to him, “Take it... . You must 
need it much worse than we do”; importantly, he does as she says and takes it 
(92). In this way, Charlotte shows that even though Wilbourne s nose repeat­
edly identifies her as a domesticated animal or food source, she is much more 
than this. Through her recognition of the importance of smell and her ability to 
employ it via art, she is capable of bestowing the smell of hunger and depriva­
tion onto a male through her own will and creative powers. Despite Charlottes 
terrible death owed in part to the way others ultimately “sniff out” and judge 
her infidelity, this budding artistic/feminine/sensory power, even recontained, 
remains critically important for that.6
Finally, in terms of the sense of taste, which is often referenced alongside 
the sense of smell, there are also a few moments when women are depicted as 
tasting food, or, at the very least, when they are able to control the tastes of 
men. Lena Grove is one such character. When she is pregnant and on the road 
searching for the father of her child, there is a scene where she gets to taste 
food with great sensory delight: “She eats slowly, steadily, sucking the rich 
sardine oil from her fingers with slow and complete relish” (LA 29). Of course 
right in the middle of Lena’s feast, her child moves and causes her pain, and 
we are told that she is “stilled in midchewing” and her “face has drained of 
color, of its full, hearty blood” (29). Thus, in a way, this scene depicts how a 
male can interrupt a woman’s ability to taste and enjoy food even before he 
is born. Another instance where a woman tastes food is Eula’s mother, Mrs 
Varner. The narrator describes her by saying that “Her conviction was that
6 Cousin Drusilla in The Unvanquished is arguably another notable female character capable of actively 
bestowing smell on others. My exploration of Drusilla’s striking capacity for “gender bending” will be exten­
sively treated elsewhere in an essay devoted to smell and queerness in Faulkner.
 74 Laura Davis A Sensory Studies Approach to Nine Faulkner Texts
the proper comingling of food ingredients lay not on any printed page but in 
the taste of the stirring spoon” (H 108). Unfortunately, the passage goes on 
to talk about Mrs Varner’s illiteracy and her belief that women should not be 
educated, so this instance is complicated by the fact that she is focused on her 
sense of taste at the expense of her ability to read. Other disruptions include 
Addies disparaging remarks on Cora’s cooking in As I Lay Dying (174) and 
Eula Varner’s consumption of “baked sweet potatoes” and “cold” potatoes in 
The Hamlet (127, 136), both of which demonstrate female characters using 
their non-visual senses to express an opinion or preference.
Moments in these nine texts where female characters are depicted as in­
terrupting men’s ability to taste and/or moments where men are positioned 
as food for women are also quite rare but do occasionally exist. For example, 
we are told that Eula has such an impact on the schoolteacher Labove that 
he would “eat the food which he would not even taste” (H 131), so in this 
instance, Eula is in some ways dictating a man’s ability to enjoy his sensory 
palate. Likewise, when Chick’s father realizes that Gavin’s problem is that he’s 
in love with Eula, he says, “So that’s what’s been eating you for the past two 
weeks” (T 41). This is an instance where, through a turn of speech, for once, 
a woman is metaphorically eating a man, and a man is thus positioned as 
food for her to taste. Eula’s daughter Linda is described as having a similar 
moment with Gavin when Gavin chooses to court Linda by buying her treats 
at the local ice cream parlor. Not only does Linda get to enjoy food in these 
scenes, but Mr. Mallison even says, “maybe someday she’ll even look at him 
[Gavin] like she was looking at that banana split” (158-59). In other words, 
through the sense of taste, Mr. Mallison acknowledges that women also have 
hungers, even sexual ones, and that men might also be desirable food for 
them to taste and consume.
V. Conclusions
For good reason, critics have long been interested in Faulkner’s depictions 
of the sense-laden South and have explored the symbolic meanings of cer­
tain scents especially. However, perhaps even this cursory first exploration 
of Faulkner’s texts hints that we also owe a debt to our colleagues in fields 
like history and anthropology who are endeavoring via sensory studies to 
connect sensory experience with systems of cultural beliefs and moral judg­
ments. While the study of literature (and often the historical and cultural 
milieus that such literature represents) involves the reading and interpreting 
of texts rather than studying behavior through empirical approaches, em­
ploying a sensory studies framework can still lead us to explore how and 
why fictional characters use their senses in ways that shed light on cultural 
ideas and human behavior. As such a project shows, when we employ a close 
reading of Faulkner’s fiction to examine how characters actively employ their
 The Faulkner Journal Fall 2014 75
noses or to explore how their beliefs about smells and tastes help them or­
ganize and make sense of the world, a surprising number of pervasive and 
consistent patterns do emerge that shed new light on cultural ideas about 
gender and sexual behavior as well as on various characters, scenes, and even 
plot. Hopefully this indicates that there is much more productive work to be 
done in this area and that literary scholars have a great deal yet to contribute 
to the field of sensory studies.
Kennesaw State University
 76 Laura Davis A Sensory Studies Approach to Nine Faulkner Texts
Works Cited
Beam, Patricia. “Beached on the Sands of Creativity: The Bad Smell of The Wild Palms!' Journal 
of English 14 (1986): 45-54. ProQuest. Web. 4 Feb. 2016.
Carmignani, Paul. “Olfaction in Faulkner’s Fiction.” Mississippi Quarterly 43.3 (1990): 305-15.
Classen, Constance, ed. The Book of Touch. Oxford: Berg, 2005.
------ , ed. A Cultural History of the Senses. 6 vols. London: Bloomsbury, 2014.
Classen, Constance, David Howes, and Anthony Synnott. Aroma: The Cultural History of Smell. 
London: Routledge, 1994.
Donaldson, Susan V. and Anne Goodwyn Jones. “Haunted Bodies: Rethinking the South through 
Gender.” Introduction. Haunted Bodies: Gender and Southern Texts. Ed. Donaldson and 
Jones. Charlottesville: UP of Virginia, 1997. 1-19.
Faulkner, William. Absalom, Absalom!. 1936. The Corrected Text. New York: Vintage Interna­
tional, 1990.
------ . As I Lay Dying. 1930. The Corrected Text. New York: Vintage International, 1990.
------ . Go Down, Moses. 1942. New York: Vintage International, 1990.
------ . The Hamlet. 1940. The Corrected Text. New York: Vintage International, 1991.
------ . If I Forget Thee, Jerusalem [The Wild Palms], 1939. New York: Vintage International, 1995.
------ . Light in August. 1932. The Corrected Text. New York: Vintage International, 1990.
------ . The Sound and the Fury. 1929. The Corrected Text. New York: Vintage International, 1990.
------ . The Town. 1957. William Faulkner: Novels 1957-1962. New York: Lib. of Amer., 1999.
1-326.
------ . The Unvanquished. 1938. The Corrected Text. New York: Vintage International, 1991.
Fulton, Lorie Watkins. “William Faulkners Wistaria: The Tragic Scent of the South.” Southern 
Studies 11.1-2 (2004): 1-9. ProQuest. Web. 4 Feb. 2016.
Gobble, Maryanne M. “The Significance of Verbena in William Faulkner’s ‘An Odor of Verbena.’” 
Mississippi Quarterly 53.4 (2000): 569-82. ProQuest. Web. 4 Feb. 2016.
Gwin, Minrose C. The Feminine and Faulkner: Reading (Beyond) Sexual Difference. Knoxville: U 
of Tennessee P, 1990.
Gwynn, Frederick L. and Joseph L. Blotner, eds. Faulkner in the University. 1959. Charlottesville: 
UP of Virginia, 1995.
Howes, David. “The Craft of the Senses.” Centre for Sensory Studies. Concordia University, n.d. 
Web. 10 June 2015.
------ , ed. Empire of the Senses: The Sensual Culture Reader. Oxford: Berg, 2005.
------ . “The Expanding Field of Sensory Studies.” Sensory Studies. N.p., n.d. Web. 15 June 2015.
------ . Sensual Relations: Engaging the Senses in Culture and Social Theory. Ann Arbor: U of
Michigan P, 2003. Web. 4 Feb. 2016.
Jarvis, Christina. ‘“Like a lady I Et’: Faulkner, Food, and Femininity.” Wagner-Martin 59-80.
Kartiganer, Donald M. and Ann J. Abadie, eds. Faulkner and Gender: Faulkner and Yoknapataw­
pha, 1994. Jackson: UP of Mississippi, 1996.
 The Faulkner Journal Fall 2014 77
Largey, Gale Peter, and David Rodney Watson. “The Sociology of Odors.” American Journal of 
Sociology 77.6 (1972): 1021-34.
Roberts, Diane. Faulkner and Southern Womanhood. Athens: U of Georgia P, 1994.
Ruckel, Terri Smith. “The Scent of a New World Novel: Translating the Olfactory Language of 
Faulkner and Garcia Marquez.” Diss. Louisiana State U, 2006. ProQuest. Web. 4 Feb. 2016.
Smith, Mark M. How Race is Made: Slavery, Segregation, and the Senses. Chapel Hill: U of North 
Carolina P, 2006.
------ . “Producing Sense, Consuming Sense, Making Sense: Perils and Prospects for Sensory His­
tory.” Journal of Social History 40.4 (2007): 841-58. Project MUSE. Web. 4 Feb. 2016.
Wagner-Martin, Linda, ed. William Faulkner: Six Decades of Criticism. East Lansing: Michigan 
State UP, 2002.
Witt, Robert W. “On Faulkner and Verbena.” The Southern Literary Journal 27.1 (1994): 73-84. 
ProQuest. Web. 4 Feb. 2016.
Zender, Karl F. “Faulkner and the Power of Sound.” PMLA 99.1 (1984): 89-108. ProQuest. Web. 
4 Feb. 2016.
Zhou, Wen, et al. “Chemosensory Communication of Gender through Two Human Steroids in 
a Sexually Dimorphic Manner.” Current Biology 24.10 (2014): 1091-95. Web. 4 Feb. 2016.
