7 Thoreau and the Literary Excursion Most of Thoreau's works might be described as catalogues extended through time and space. His favorite form, as noted earlier, is the romantic excursion: a ramble ("Walking")or trip (Cape Cod) or sojourn (Walden) which takes on overtones of a spiritual quest as the speaker proceeds. Thoreau's later journals have the same rhythm. Like the conversation, the sermon, and the essay, the excursion is also a potentially encyclopedic formo Though somewhat more controlled by the obligation to de- scribe a particular setting, it tends to become, in effect, an account of the whole universe as it appears to the speaker, par- ticularly in the two books Thoreau published during his life- time. This comprehensiveness is due in large part to the extra- ordinary gift for microcosm which Emerson was the first to notice in him, the ability to infer the "universal law from the single fact" (W, X, 474). This very transcendental mode of perception gives rise to what J ohn Broderick rightly calls the fundamental movement of Thoreau's prose-from observation to speculation and back again-and to his breadth of allusion. Thoreau did not travel far in his lifetime; but, as John Christie has shown, his imagination ranged throughout the world.1 1 Broderick, "The Movement of Thoreau's Prose," American Literature, 33 (1961), 133-142, rpt. in The Recognition of Henry David Thoreau, ed. Wendell Glick (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1969), 324-334. Christie, Thoreau as World Traveler (New York: Columbia University Press, 1965). 188 Thoreau and the Literary Excursion 189 Whereas Emerson built his essays around concepts of uni- versal order, Thoreau began with his environment and tried to invest it with meaning. Temporal continuity in his writing is usualIy more important than the continuity of abstract ideas which unifies Emerson's prose and characterizes most of the rest of Transcendentalist literature. Thoreau's excursions, con- sequently, cannot be considered as typical of the movement to the same degree as the forms and techniques discussed earlier. Still, the excursions can be called representative in the Emer- sonian sense, in that they attempt to carry out to practical ful- filment the spirit of the Transcendentalists' largely theoretical fascination with nature. NearIy aH of Thoreau's adult life was devoted to proving the validity of correspondence in his own experience. Few of the Transcendentalists except for the Con- cord group took Thoreau's example very seriously, at least dur- ing his lifetime, but most endorsed both the general principIe of living close to nature and the romantic excursion as a literary formo Thoreau's choice of form reflected the prevailing taste of his age. Travel writing of various kinds had always been very popu- lar in America: scientific expeditions (e.g. Darwin's Voyage 01 a Naturalist Round the World), records of exploration (Bracken- ridge's Journal of a Voyage up the River Missouri), shipwreck and captivity narratives (Melville's Typee), grand tours of for- eign and domestic parts by literary gentlefolk (Goethe's ltalien- ische Reise), and so forth. Indeed on both sides of the Atlantic, in the earIy years of the 19th century, it seemed to one reviewer that almost everybody who "happens once in his life to wander from the precincts of his own native village, thinks it his duty to enlighten the publick with a narrative of his adventures." 2 The North American Review regularIy devoted two or three major articles each year to travel books; Thoreau is known to have 2 Jared Sparks, "Riley's Narrative," North American Review, 5 (1817), 119°· Word and World read at least 146 of them, including all the works just listed.3 There were several reasons for the vogue of travel writing, especially in America: the rise of romanticism; 4 the largely un- explored condition of America; the self-consciousness and pro- vincialism of the new nation, which stimulated intense interest among Americans in European travelers' reports about them and in compatriots' reports of Europe; 5 and the didactic orienta- tion of the American aesthetic. Like lyceum lectures, travel lit- erature could be delightful without ceasing to be ostensibly in- structive. Fascinating glimpses of exotic spots could be pur- veyed as "scientific information." Such works were also rela- tively easy to produce. "He must be dull indeed," one critic declared, "who cannot give a tolerably interesting account of very interesting places." 6 For all these reasons, many of the prominent serious and popular writers in America during the nineteenth century tried their hand at travel writing, including the Transcendentalists. 3 Christie, p. 42. Actually, his bibliography of those works (pp. 313-333) excludes a few works which might al50 be put into the travel literature category, such as William Gilpin's Remarks on Forest Scenery, and Other Woodland Views, a book which is as close or closer to Thoreau's own 50rt of travel book than almost any of the 146 listed works. 4 For a discussion of the idea of travel as a romanticist phenomenon, see George B. Parks, "The Turn to the Romantic in the Travel Literature of the Eighteenth Century," Modern Language Quarterly, 25 (1964), 22-33. For a particular example example of romanticism in travel literature, see Herbert Barrows, "Convention and Novelty in the Romantic Generation's Experience of Italy," in Literature as a Mode 01 Travel, ed. Warner G. Rice (New York: New York Public Library, 1963), pp. 6g-84. 5 For an analysis of Americans abroad during this period, see Neil Harris, The Artist in American Society (New York: Braziller, 1966), pp. 124-168; for Europeans in America, see Max Berger, The British Traveler in Amer- ica rBJ6-60 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1943)' For American interest in domestic travel, see Robert C. Bredeson, "Landscape Descrip- tion in Nineteenth-Century American Travel Literature," American Quar- terly, 20 (1968), 86-g4. 6 W. P. Ma5On, "Delano's Voyages and Travels," North American Re- view,5 (1817), 245· Thoreau and the Literary Excursion Poe wrote two fictional narratives; Melville began as a travel romancer; Cooper's fiction has a strong travel interest, as do es Hawthorne's Marble Faun; Washington Irving, Bayard Taylor, and George William Curtis each wrote several literary trav- elogues. Among the Transcendentalists, the ros ter of travel books ineludes not only Thoreau's work but also Emerson's English Traits) Margaret Fuller's Summer on the Lakes and At Home and Abroad) Bartol's Pictures oi Europe) James F. Clarke's Eleven Weeks in Europe) and (in a sense) Ellery Chan- ning's Conversations in Rome. These books varied widely in style and scope and quality, from the hurried reportage of Clarke and Fuller's European book to the analytical overview of English Traits to Bartol's serious attempt at prose poetry. But all share a basically literary, rather than factual, approach. To the extent that they make any elaims on the reader's atten- tion, then or now, it is as imaginative reinterpretations of their subject rather than as guidebooks or as compendia of informa- tion, although they do supply generous amounts of data and moral directive. All the Transcendentalist authors, especially those who traveled in Europe, were well aware that they were going over ground already covered many times before, and that their own contribution, such as it was, would consist in supply- ing new points of view-in deploying the resources of their wit, descriptive ability, capacity for original reflection, and eye for the out-of-the-way detail. Literary criticism of travel writing is still in its infancy, and virtually nothing has been written about the formal conventions of such works,7 partly because the genre is so miscellaneous. 7 Most of the extant criticism deals with content rather than style. Christie is representative: on Thoreau's interest in travel, travel reading, and allusions to travel books, he is definitive; on problems of form he is sketchy. But see his last two chapters (pp. 245-271) for sorne discussion of the travel book as a formal model for Thoreau. 1 know of no satisfactory study of the stylistic conventions of American travel writing during the early nineteenth century, though of course much has been done on the interest of writers in Europe and the frontier. Word and World The travels of Marco Polo, Harriet Martineau, Thor Heyerdal, and D. H. Lawrence apparently have little in common; even the Transcendentalist works listed aboye vary greatly in style and structure. Nevertheless, sorne generalizations can be made about the state of travel writing in the early nineteenth century which will help c1arify Thoreau's literary purposes and those of the Transcendentalists as a whole. To start with, we must realize that the literary travel book was then in a transitional state, just beginning (in America at least) to be distinguished from a factual account or analysis, but not yet recognized as different in kind. For Howells and James, living in the era after the Civil War, travel writing was un- anibiguously an art, to be judged by the same high standards of stylistic refinement and formal coherence as would be applied to prose fiction. James, for example, considered the traditional epistolary or journalistic methods of organizing travel books unsatisfactory even for a talented writer: "His work will doubt- less furnish a considerable amout of entertaining; but there will yet be something essentially common in its character. The book will be diffuse, overgrown, shapeless; it will not belong to literature." 8 Earlier critics, however, were less stringent in their literary standards than James, though they too complained of the slipshod ease with which many such works were written. Jared Sparks, for example, was inc1ined to think that "the eye of criticism should pass gently over the pages of the traveller,- it should be contented with gazing on what is new and interest- ing from its intrinsick value, although it may not be dressed out in so good ataste, and under so attracting a form as could be desired." 9 This remark suggests that the reviewer looks to travel literature primarily for new information, rather than for high arto Sure enough, he continues: "There is one indispens- 8 "Howell's Italian Journeys," North Amen·ican Review, 106 (1868), 336- 337. For additional strictures by James, see his reviews in The Nation, especially 16 (1873), 152; 20 (1875), 279-280; and 21 (1875), 29-3°, 264-265. 9 "Riley's Narrative," North American Review, 5 (1817), 391. Thoreau and the Literary Excursion 193 able requisite however, in books of travels, without which they can have neither interest nor value;-we mean veracity." 10 1naccuracy is to Sparks what "want of method" is to James, and the same applies to most other early N orth American reviewers. The primary demand they made of the travel writer was that he be "a just and clear observer"-especialIy if he happened to be a European traveling in the United States.u Traveler's who mixed fact and fancy were suspect, even if their writing showed talento Francis Bowen objected to George Borrow's account of the Gypsies on the ground that imagina ti ve liberties "seriously impair[e d] the credibility of the book." .12 Another critic scoffed at what he called "imaginative" trave1ers who went to the Holy Land "in order to write poetry," since "their journals are not trustworthy records of what they saw and heard." 13 Two Years before the Mast was highly regarded not because it was well-written, although Boston reviewers agreed that it was, but because it gave an "accurate" and aboye alI moralistic description of the life of sailors. 1ts fictive virtues were, in the opinion of the Christian Examiner, a positive dis- advantage, inasmuch as they tended to lure the reader into sea- faring. 14 When the reviewers of the 1820S and 1830S took it upon them- selves to outline a model for prospective travel writers to follow, what they usually recommended, therefore, was not that the genre should beco me more amusing or more elegant or more imaginative but that it should be more rigorously analytical. "The only sort of travels that will, we think, hereafter be much 10 ¡bid. 11 W. B. o. Peabody, "Travels of Reed and Matheson," Narth American Review, 41 (1835),493. 12 "The Gypsies," ibid., 55 (1842), 73. 13 C. Emerson, "Robinson's Travels in Palestine and Arabia," ibid., 53 (1841),176. 14 William Ware, "Twa Y ears befare the Mast," Christian Examiner, 29 (1840), 270. See also Edward Tyrell Channing's review in the Narth Ameri- can Review, 52 (1841), 56-75. 194 Word and World sought for," opined Edward Everett, will concentrate rather "on topics of statistical and political information, on the condition, pursuits, and manners of the people, than on pictures, statues, and ruins." 15 An entertaining popularizer with a careful eye for detail was welcome, another reviewer conceded, but what the field really needed was more "rigidly honest" scholarly investi- gators.16 The concession is significant, however. Apart from their role as arbiters of taste, the reviewers did appreciate travel literature for its entertainment value; and they were also aware of, and to sorne extent sympathetic to, a growing popular interest in imag- inative travels, coinciding with the rise of the romantic move- mento One critic traced travelers' preoccupations with "fanciful speculations" to the influence oI Mme de Stael's Germany; 17 other sources were Wordsworth's poetry and Byron's Childe Harold; eighteenth-century topographical poetry and prose pic- turesque; and the sentimental journeys of Sterne and Goethe. The collective impact of these influences was such as to encour- age a more subjective and loosely "poetic" approach to traveI description. Though Boston reviewers couId not, as a matter of principIe, prder it to the factual approach, they were capable of appreciating it when they met with it in a favorite author like Washington Irving.18 The North American Review even printed an occasional excerpt or manuscript by subjective-poeti- cal travelers. One such example is the record of a short "Pe- destrian Tour" of New EngIand by one "H. Tudor" in 1817. Rere is an excerpt: June Ist. To Keene, 43 miles.-Overslept ourselves at Pepperell, set off after breakfast, and walked six miles, then being tired of moving so slow from home, took the stage, and arrived here at 15 "Italy," North American Review, 12 (1821),200. 16 C. Emerson, "Robinson's Travels," p. 177. Cf. John G. Palfrey, "Von Raumer's England," North American Review, 43 (1836),446. 17 J. C. Gray, "Foreign Travel," North American Review, 9 (1819), 260. 18 Review of Irving's A Tour on the Prairies, ibid., 41 (1835), 1-28. Thoreau and the Literary Excursion 195 8, P.M. We have passed to day through a number of "clever towns," but have seen nothing worth remarking, except the Monadnock mountain, at a distance, and seven beautiful girls en passant, which 1 have observed this day; it is remarkable, and 1 mention it for the benefit of artists, what a fine, warm, and mellow tone, objects like these, in the front ground, give to a landscape; one of these maidens, with a sparkling, open countenance, rose-tinted, trans- parent complexion, falling shoulders, and rounded arms, light elastic step, small foot, and tapering ancle, [sic] (it must be ob- served that, Brachia et vultum, teretesque suras Integer laude) formed one of the most picturesque studies 1 ever saw, and 1 sighed that 1 was not an artist. The latter part of this road is a gentle descent for two miles, shaded by tall trees, and with a fine stream running by the road side,19 Tudor's log resembles Thoreau's usual travel style, despite ob- vious differences, in its day-by-day structure, its attempt to intermix facts and entertainment, its academic wit, and its tendency to overrefine ideas. There is no reason to believe that Thoreau ever saw Tudor's account but he would have found some of the same qualities in authors he did read, such as Gil- pin, Goethe, Purchas, and Sterne. As the centurx.progressed, the imaginative approach to travel- writing continued to gain ground, not only because the roman- tic movement encouraged an expressivist approach to writing 19 North American Review, 4 (1817), 176-177. This style should be contrasted with that of another New England traveler, whose work Thoreau knew well, Timothy Dwight, Travels in New England and New York (1822; rpt., ed. Barbara Solomon [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1969])' Dwight's book is a compendium of information on the re- gion, based on many years and sorne 18,000 miles of traveling. It was books like Dwight's, which in themselves had enough of the quaintness of ama- teurism to appeal to the imagination of a Thoreau, that led to more schol<irly accounts of their subject on the one hand, and supplied the factual groundwork for more creative travelers like Thoreau on the other. 196 Word and World and an idealized view of exotic locations and the life of adven- ture, but also in part because the sheer volume of previous travel books had made it impossible to say anything distinctive about the usual watering places unless one was extremely crea- tive, or else intimidatingly thorough. Gone were the days when "the mere circumstance of traveling" was thought sufficient to allow a gentleman"the right of forcing on the public an account of his breakfasts and nights' lodgings." 20 The gentleman ama- teur and his wilderness counterpart, the untutored explorer, were being replaced by two different kinds of reporters: the professional writer on the one hand and the professional his- torian, sociologist, geographer, naturalist, or archaeologist on the other. Even today it is still of course possible for anyone who circumnavigates the globe in a small sailboat or travels to main- land China to publish his impressions, just as in the earIy nine- teenth century any literate person who had se en Japan or Tahiti or Africa was assured of an American audience and a review in the North American. But the opportunities for amateurs are much more limited now, and during the nineteenth century they shrank progressively. George William Curtis summed up the situation for the literary travelogue in 1855 when he de- clared that if the work is not "poetic" it will be "soon for- gotten." 21 The center of literary interest in such writing, Curtis goes on to say, is not what the traveler sees or the adventures he experi- ences, but the self-portrayal of the traveller himself.22 In this, as in several other respects, Curtis was the child of Transcenden- talism. The Transcendentalists, in general, departed from the Unitarian line of travel-writing in the same way they did on other issues: by stressing the importance of the individual mind over that of empirical fact. Caleb Stetson, for example, review- ing Fuller's Summer on the LakesJ was pleased to find that she "is much more occupied with what is passing in her own soul, 20 Edward Everett, "Italy," North American Review, 12 (1821), 198. 21 "American Travelers," Putnam's Monthly Magazine, 5 (1855), 564. 22 ¡bid., p. 568. Thoreau and the Literary Excursion 197 than with the objective realities which present themselves to the senses." His only complaint was that "she does not let her thought or emotion write itself out" sufficiently.23 Frederic Hedge, in the same vein, dec1ared that what "we care to read about" in travel books is not paintings and churches and rivers and mountains, "but the reflection of these in genial and ori- ginal minds. The most interesting travels are those that have the least to say about the very things which we go abroad to see, -such books as Eothen, and the Sentimental Journey. ... For the same reason, we like travels at home better than travels abroad." 24 Hedge's last sentence touches upon the essential idea of travel as expressed in "Self-Reliance" and the "Conclusion" to Walden. True travel is spiritual travel, an exploration of one's own higher latitudes. Travel is interpreted, in other words, in the same idealized way as the religious terminology discussed in Chapter 4, aboye. Actual travel is useless, in the Transcendentalist view of things; the chances are that it may even be a stumbling block to spiritual advancement, like the doctrine of miracles. For example, Emerson's principal notion about travel, based on personal experience, was that in most cases it signifies a futile attempt at self-escape (W, I1, 80---82; VI, 145-146). He and other Transcendentalist travelers, therefore, hedged their reports with admonishment that home is best, that travel is merely a preparative to better living at home. "The traveller learns many precious lessons," effused Bartol, "but perhaps the most precious of them aH, for which alone it is well worth one's while to take a long journey, as perhaps else it cannot be learned, is that the crown of life is in no change of place, but is to be in one's home." 25 Not that Bartol and other Transcendentalist travelers sought to deny the peripatetic impulse, however-far from it. They simply desired to make it spiritually val id, or, in Thoreau's 23 "Summer on the Lakes in 1843," Christian Examiner, 37 (1844), 274,275· 24 "Europea n Travel," ibid., 53 (1852), 240. 25 Pictures 01 Europe (Boston: Crosby, Nichols, 1855), p. 15. Word and World case, to make the best of their inability to gratify it fully. Such motives reinforced their natural literary predilection for the abstract and subjective dimensiono Emerson talked about his experience in England in terms of an analysis of the essence of the English character; Bartol used the scenes he saw on the con- tinent as illustrations for moral meditations; Fuller (in Summer on the Lakes) and Thoreau interspersed descriptive sketches with verse fragments, prose poetry, and quaint bits of historical lore. In aH these cases one becomes conscious of an interplay between the sequence of actual observations and the interests of a subjectively imposed mood or designo Neither dominates to the exclusion of the other; rather, the works oscillate between the two structural principIes. This sort of oscillation, which is to be found in many literary travelogues of the romantic period as well as among the Tran- scendentalists, was one of the features of the genre which most perplexed conservative critics. Edward Everett, for instance, enjoyed Irving's A Tour of the Prairies, but did not know quite what to make of it: To what cIass of compositions the present work belongs, we are hardly able to sayo It can scarcely be called a book of travels, for there is too much painting of manners, and scenery, and too liule statistics;-it is not a novel, for there is no story; and it is not a romance, for it is aH true. It is a sort of sentimental journey, a romantic excursion, in which nearly all the elements of several dif- ferent kinds of writing are beautifuHy and gaily blended into a production almost sui generis.26 Thoreau had but a limited interest in the purely picturesque; but his mode of writing does resemble Irving's in most of the ways listed here-in its descriptive, peripatetic, and miscel- laneous or hybrid character: part sketch, part information, part narrative, part wit, part philosophy. This resemblance is well worth insisting upon, as a reminder that the Thoreauvian ex- 26 North American Review, 41 (1835), 5-6. Thoreau and the Literary Excursion 199 cursion is not a great deal more sui generis than Irving's actually was. Thoreau criticism of the last few decades has tended to con- vey this impression by its intense concentration upon the in tri- cacies of his literary strategies.27 Much of this scholarship has been first-rate, and it has succeeded admirably in showing Tho- reau's dedication to his vocation as a writer. But in the process it has created a somewhat unbalanced picture of his work, and by extension that of other romantic travelers also. In the first place, the prevailing critical approach to Thoreau carries with it the somewhat misleading implication that literary architectonics was (or should have been) of immense concern to him. In fact, none of his books, not even Walden) is very tightly unified, nor probably designed to be, for the romantic excursion is as much a record of events and impressions as it is a poem. Even in the course of so analytical a work as Walden) there are aH sorts of meanderings and digressions: the song the speaker sings when chopping timber, the length of the diatribe against philanthropy, the inclusion of the "complemental verses," and 27 The most important analyses are F. O. Matthiessen, American Re- naissance (London: Oxford University Press, 1941), pp. 166-175: Sherman Paul, The Shores of America (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1958), pp. 293-353: Lauriat Lane, Jr., "On the Organic Structure of Walden/' College English 21 (1960), 195-202: ]. Lyndon Shanley, The Making 01 Walden (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957), pp. 74-91: and Charles R. Anderson, The Magic Circle of Walden (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1968). My own critical preferences are closer to those who continue to approach Thoreau as a stylist but who regard that style as governed not by the demands of literary structure but by the demands of his vision: e.g., Jonathan Bishop, "The Experience of the Sacred in Thoreau's Week," ELH, 33 (1966), 66-g1; Joseph Moldenhauer, "Paradox in Walden," Graduate fournal, 6 (1964), 132-146, rey. rpt. in The Recogni- tion 01 Henry David Thoreau, pp. 351-365; Reginald Cook, "Ancient Rites at Walden," Emerson Society Quarterly, No. 39 (1965), 52-56, rpt. in Twentieth Century Interpretations 01 "Walden," ed. Richard Ruland (Englewood Cliffs, N.].: Prentice-Hall, 1968), pp. 93-100; and Ethel Sey- bold, Thoreau: The Quest and the Classics (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1951). 200 W m-d and W orld so forth. It is not that these passages bear no relation to the over- all drift of the book,28 but that their charm lies more in their heterogeneity and unpredictableness than in their contribution to an overarching whole. Like a Whitman catalogue, Thoreau's writing is to be more appreciated as process than as product, more for its irregular flow than for any patterns which can be abstracted from it, although the awareness of such patterns natu- rally enhances one's pleasure in the work. A related problem with Thoreau criticism is that it has over- emphasized the symbolic implications of Thoreau's writing, to the point that one recent analyst of Walden has felt obliged to argue that the book really does have a factual leve1.29 Ves, that was a realloon, a real woodchuck-they are not just metaphors. Like all literary travel narratives, Walden is an aesthetic mon- grel, a mixture of the actual and the fictive, a report of real oc- currences which have bee n reshaped, in different degrees, by the processes of selection, reflection, ordering, heightening, and mythologizing. These points are obvious enough, to be sure. The problem is not so much with our responses to Thoreau as with our literary tools. It has become second nature for criticism to approach a work as a literary construct unified by a certain theme or themes to which the separate parts are subordinate, whereas what Thoreau actually wrote is a somewhat different article. It may not change our critical preferences, but it should help to clarify the expectations we bring to Thoreau, if we see his work as one outgrowth or variant of a larger development in excursion- writing during the romantic periodo By way of summarizing the conventions of the romantic ex- 28 Cf. Raymond Gozzi, "The Meaning of the 'Complemental Verses' in Walden," Emerson Society Quarterly, No_ 35 (1964), 7g-82. 29 William Reger, "Beyond Metaphor," Criticism, 12 (1970), 333-344. Reger proves his point conclusively by quoting Thoreau's directives to would-be bean farmers: "Plant the common small white bush bean about the first of June," etc. Thoreau and the Literary Excursion 201 cursion vis-a-vis literary Transcendentalism, the following can be said. As to method of organization, most travelogues used one of two models: the sequential, sorne times day-by-day (Tu- dor's "A Tour," lrving's Tour, Brackenridge's journal), or the topical (Mme de Stael's Germany, Tocqueville's Democracy in America, Emerson's English Traits). Thoreau preferred the former model in general, though he used the latter in Walden. A literary travel book was not expected to have a very coherent structure; one of its pleasures, indeed, as James Russell Lowell said in his review of Thoreau's A Week, was in its "happy fortuity." 30 A talent for observation and description was a sine qua non, but romantic travelers were expected to go beyond this and tell not simply "what has happened to them," but "how they have happened to the universe," in Thoreau's words (Wr, 1, 348). This was not to be interpreted as a blank check to the imagination, however: "To write a true work of fiction even, is only to take leisure and liberty to describe sorne things more exactIy as they are. A true account of the actual is the rarest poetry" (Wr, 1, 347). As these remarks suggest, there were no special ground rules for the order in which a travel writer should proceed-that would depend on the order of observation or reflection, but there was an unspoken commitment to to- tality. Edward Everett, as we have seen, wanted more compen- dious tomes than the usual fare; one of James F. Clarke's pur- poses in writing about his trip was to demonstrate "how much may be seen now in Europe, in a comparatively short time"; 31 Thoreau demanded that the observer enter into a total relation with the thing observed. Emerson, even more transcendentally, 30 "A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers," in Pertaining to Thoreau, ed. Samuel A. Jones (1901); book rpt. in Emerson Society Quar- terly, No. 62, Suppl. (1971), 15. Jones's collection and The Recognition of Henry David Thoreau, ed. Wendell Glick, contain most of the significant early criticism of Thoreau. 31 Eleven Weeks in Europe and What May Be Seen in That Time (Bos- ton: Ticknor, Reed, and Fields, 1852), p. viii. 202 Word and World declared that true travel consists "in sounding all the stops of our instrumento If I have had a good indignation and a good cornpIacency with rny brother, if I have had reverence & cornpassion, had fine weather & good Iuck in rny fishing excursion & profound thought in rny studies at horne, seen a disaster well through; and wrought well in rny garden, nor faiIed rny part at a banquet, then I have travelled, though all was within the Iirnits of a rniIe frorn rny house. [lMN, VIII, 18] This gets at the heart of what the excursion meant for Thoreau, both in life and as a literary endeavor. It was a succession of confrontations with nature, from each of which the observer is expected to extract as much as he can, the mark of success being not so much in the planning of one's itinerary or imaginative rearrangement of events as in the way in which he runs the gamut of events as they occur. In light of aH this, the question of Walden's structural and poetic integrity seems Iess important than it is often represented as being; and Walden as a whole seems Iess important relative to Thoreau's other works, which have been somewhat unjustly neglected. Even when considered as a travelogue, Walden emerges as Thoreau's masterpiece, of course, for not only does it carry the principIe of significant travel as interior travel far- ther than any other Transcendentalist work, it is also more thorough and sophisticated on the level of observation than the rest of Thoreau's writing. Cape Cod) The Maine Woods) and A Yankee in Canada) indeed, differ from the general run of tourist accounts only in being a bit more perceptive and fluent. At the same time the generic approach reminds us that these works can bear comparison to Walden; that Walden is not in a class by itself, but a variant or extension of a form which all share loosely in common; and that Walden's present critical rep- utation relative to Thoreau's other books is partIy a modern Thoreau and the Literary Excursion accident, insofar as it derives from Walden's being (1) more conducive to metaphorical interpretation and (2) more cohesive than the other travelogues with their arrangement of narrative plus digressions. The nineteenth century cared les s about either virtue. Though Walden was even then generally conceded to be Thoreau's best work, it was not elevated to such unapproachable stature as it enjoys today. John Weiss, for example, preferred Cape Cod (because it was less preachy and more genial), and Edwin Morton even considered A Week to be a more "artistic and beautiful performance" in respect to form! Of course Mor- ton was only a Harvard undergraduate.32 Of all Thoreau's books, A Week on the Concord and Merri- mack Rivers is probably most illuminated by an understanding of the travel-writing tradition, because it presents on the surface the most perplexing mixture of subject matters and levels of style. The usual explanation for the book's apparent vagaries is Tho- reau's immaturity as a writer: he had not yet found his own me- dium; besides, he wanted to memorialize his juvenilia and thus turned his book into something "perilously like a library of the shorter works of Henry Thoreau," as Canby wittiIy remarks.33 A good deal of the apparent vagary of A Week, however, might better be explained as an attempt to master the tendency toward the poetic which we have remarked in the romantic excursion. Thoreau's affinities with this popular tendency should not be overstated, in view of the notorious commercial failure of the book (aIthough the one popular magazine which reviewed it gave it a very favorable notice) 34 and the fact that several ro- manticist critics showed as much impatience as twentieth- cen- 32 Weiss, "Thoreau," in Jones rpt., p. 46. Morton, "Thoreau and His Books," ¡bid., p. 23. 33 Thoreau (Boston: Houghton MifHin, 1939), p. 272. 34 [Sarah Josepha Hale], review in Godey's Lady's Book, Glick, p. 4. Mrs. Hale mistook the author for Whittier, however, and may perhaps not have read as far as the free-thinking parts of "Sunday." 2°4 Word and World tury readers with its digressiveness (though much of their ob- jection was based on dislike of Thoreau's ideas).35 Nevertheless, Thoreau should not be pictured simply as an artist with a unique combination of interests trying, as yet unsuccessfuIly, to create in solitude a harmonious fusion of philosophy and local chronide. He was writing in a day when pedestrian tours which juxtaposed statistics, alluring wenches, and Latin quotations were publishable in the best journals; when self-confessed pot- pourris of prairie anecdotes and descriptive sketches received good reviews; and the ex-editor of The Dial could attempt to finance her summer on the lakes by dashing off a concoction of gossip, preachment, platonic dialogue, and lndian lore, and receive favorable notice in the Christian Examiner.36 The prob- lem was rather that Thoreau, being a more serious writer than FuIler and Irving and H. Tudor, carried the experiment too far in the transcendental direction, for too long, and too impiously (in "Sunday") for his first book to make any headway against the natural indifference of a reading public which had never heard of him. Lowell's impatient thrust gets at the heart of the matter: "We were bid to a river-party, not to be preached at." 37 In the popu- lar romantic excursions of the era there is, so to speak, a convention of levity, a tacit assumption that the prevailing at- mosphere is going to be bucolic reverie or musing, which will 35 Lowell, Jones rpt., pp. 15-16; George Ripley, "H. D. Thoreau's Book," ibid., pp. 9-12; review of A Week in London Athenaeum, Glick, pp. 4-5. John Weiss evidently considered the idea of reflective digressions a virtue but disliked Thoreau's carping tone ("Thoreau," Jones rpt., p. 46). Moncure Conway ("Thoreau," Fraser's Magazine, 73 [1866], 448-452) and H. S. Salt (The Lile 01 Henry David Thoreau [London: Richard Bentley, 1890], p. 141) found the digressiveness charming. 36 Perry Miller contends that Thoreau received from Summer on the Lakes "much of the impetus" for A Week (Margaret Fuller: American Romantic, ed. Miller [New York: Doubleday, 1963], p. 116). This is pure conjecture, however. 37 Jones rpt., p. 16. Thoreau and the Literary Excursion furnish both author and reader an escape from business and the city into a pastoral dream-world. George William Curtis, for instance, begins his book of sketches, Lotus-Eating: Not four days away from the city, 1 have not yet done roaming, bewildered with the summer's breath, through the garden, smelling of all the flowers, and returning to He upon the lawn, and bask, dreaming, in the July sun." 38 The passage is startlingly like the first canto of Whitman's "Song of Myself"-and justly so, because that poem also takes its im- pulse from the same theme as the poetic excursion, the idyllic escape. (Another parallel is that Curtis' topographical musings range freely in space and time over much of America and Eu- rope.) Much of Whitman's poetry could in fact be categorized also in terms of the other conventions of the romantic excursion described above.S9 The difference between Whitman and Tho- reau and the popular excursion, in addition to the fact that their writing is simply more difficult, is that they refuse to do no more than daydream; they must also prophesy, whereas Mar- garet Fuller is largely content to remain on the level of descrip- tion and anecdote.40 This made Whitman and Thoreau less popular but truer to Transcendentalist ideals of arto N ow that we have looked at the Thoreauvian excursion in its nineteenth-century context, it may be worthwhile to examine 38 Lotus·Eating: A Summer Book (New York: Harper, 1854), pp. ll-U. This was really the sort of book Mrs. Hale thought she was recommending (see note 34, aboye). S9 The motif of travel in Whitman's poetry has often been pointed out, e.g., Gay Wilson ABen, "The 'Long Journey' Motif," Walt Whitman as Man, Poet, and Legend (Carbondale, Ill.: Southern Illinois University Press, 1961), pp. 62-83. Allen and other commentators emphasize the symbolic aspects of this motif, but it is quite likely that on one level Whitman would have responded to a writer like Curtis, for his sensuous evocation of sights and scenes. 40 At the opposite extreme, Cyrus Bartol, io Pictures 01 Europe, is far more preachy thao Thoreau aod Whitman, but he carries it off by pre- seoting his work quite fraokly as a series of sermoos 00 exotic texts. 206 Word and World A Week in detail. Relatively few readings have been attempted, and almost none which scrutinize it in its entirety-probably because it is a very hard book to hold in one's mind.41 The criti- cism which exists, furthermore, is divided rather sharply be- tween those who see A Week primarily as a narrative with philo- sophical interpolations which mar its unity,42 and those who see it as a thematic progression with certain unassimilable ele- ments.43 From the foregoing, it would seem that both these lines of thought are based on inaccurate assumptions about the genre. 41 The most detailed general interpretation is Sherman Paul, The Shores of America, pp. 191-233, especially pp. 210 ff, though Paul has relatively little to say about events after Tuesday. He sees A Week es- sentially as the record of the "ecstasy" Thoreau felt during his Walden years. William B. Stein interprets the book as a movement toward spiri- tual enlightenment along Oriental lines, ("Thoreau's First Book: A Spoor of Yoga," Emerson Society Quarterly, No. 41 [1965], 3-25; "Thoreau's A Week and Om Cosmography," American Transcendental Quarterly, No. 11 [1971], 15-37). jonathan Bishop, in "The Experience of the Sacred in Thoreau's A Week," reads the excursion into nature as an encounter with a more westemized God and draws a provocative analogy between Tho- reau's ambivalent feelings about wildemess and about the deity. V. K. Chari brieHy discusses the relationship between narrative and philosophical levels in "The Question of Form in Thoreau's A Week," in lndian Essays in American Literature: Papers in Honor of Robert E. Spiller, ed. Sujit Mukherjee and D. V. K. Raghavacharyulu (Bombay: Popular Prakashan, 1969), pp. 99-112. Carl Hovde gives a detailed account of Thoreau's use of literary sources and manuscript revisions in his Ph.D. dissertation, "The Writing of Henry D. Thoreau's A Week on the Concord and Me1'rimack Rivers: A Study in Textual Materials and Technique" (Princeton Uni- versity, 1956), (a part of which has been revised and published in "Literary Materials in Thoreau's A Week," PMLA, 80 [1965], 76-83). 42 This was the opinion of Lowell, whose review is the best nineteenth- century essay on A Week. Among those modern commentators in general agreement are Canby, Thoreau, pp. 270-275; Chari, p. 111; and especially Walter Harding, The Days of Henry Thoreau (New York: Knopf, 1965), pp. 247-248, and Harding, ed., A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers (New York: Holt, Rinehart &: Winston, 1963), pp. xi-xviii. 43 Among those who take this view are Paul, Stein, and Bishop. Thoreau and the Literary Excursion A Week has other claims on our attention here. It is Tho- reau's most "transcendental" work; it is also, in an important way, the most ambitious book which the movement produced, with the exception of Theodore Parker's A Discourse 01 Matters Pertaining to ReligionJ which attempts a comprehensive the- ology. In respect to scope, even Walden is parochial by com- parison, being confined to a more limited geographical area and frame of reference, and in this sen se suggesting the narrowing of Thoreau's intellectual range which reaches its conclusion in the later journal and the posthumous travelogues. Undoubtedly A Week is a less finished performance. But if one applies Tho- reau's own touchstones of "extravagance" and "obscurity" set forth in Walden's "Conclusion" (understanding these terms as Thoreau did, as terms of praise), then A Week compares very favorably. For it attempts nothing less than to encompass the whole of Thoreau's intellectual and spiritual development, in- deed to take in the whole cultural history of mankind. This is clearly a quixotic task, but by the same token it puts A Week in the same category with those other great American failures, from Melville to Dreiser to Williams, which together make up so much of what is interesting in our literary history. Finally, A Week seems also to suggest a certain awareness of failure, notwithstanding the general verdict that it is a "joyous" book, "a soul's voyage gaily taken on the tides of youthful hope." 44 Despite its frequent exuberance, A Week has a marked elegiac quality, which increases as the days wear on. Unlike Walden J which ends with the renewal of spring, A Week begins in summer and ends in fallo Whatever somberness it may con- tain no doubt derives originally from its nominal "muse" or in- spiration, Thoreau's dead brother; but beyond this, it displays sorne of the same anxieties about the natural order as a whole that we have se en in Transcendentalist catalogue rhetoric and will see again, more dramaticalIy, in the poetry of Channing. 44 Paul, pp. 195, 194.