american 
indifference 
to art 
an anachronistic myth 
j. meredith neil 
Americans, like every other people, have relied upon certain myths to 
sustain their sense of national identity. In order to maintain the belief 
that they had a uniquely important role in human history, the American 
people denied, until quite recently, that a real class structure existed in 
the United States, just as they insisted that every boy had an equal oppor­
tunity to rise to the highest political offices in the land. Although we are 
becoming aware that these and related assertions exemplify an increas­
ingly anachronistic mythology—one that stands in the way of what we 
define as social justice—no one has yet pointed to the part that our still 
widely accepted notion of American art history has contributed to that 
mythology. 
A standard lament heard throughout our national history has been 
that Americans, in their mad scramble for wealth and comfort, fail to 
show any appreciation for the arts. Editorials in one short-lived Balti­
more magazine of 1807 merely phrased more colorfully than is usual the 
standard refrain to be heard for the next century and a half: "Of stones 
it would be easier to raise up children to Abraham, than to inspire a 
taste for the Arts, where the wharves, the banks, and the markets, are the 
national museums and the temple of genius." One's only recourse, Eliza 
Anderson concluded, was to attend a concert, hoping ". . . the distin­
guished musicians of our city, will combine their harmonious sounds, to 
banish from our memories that we are here, in the very Siberia of the 
arts."1 
The accusation seldom occurred, however, until the first years of the 
nineteenth century. Before the American Revolution critics either failed 
to appear at all, or, when they did, they took for granted that colonies 
93 
 shared in the cultural honors of the mother country. Once we had 
achieved our independence, of course, it followed that American art and 
culture must stand on their own merits. In the first few years after the 
conclusion of the War for Independence, cultural nationalists urged the 
need for a distinctive national taste, prescribed its general character, and 
viewed the future with unbounded confidence. A very typical piece on 
the glories of "American Genius" was published in 1787. Citing Jeffer­
son's Notes on Virginia as an effective refutation of European theories of 
degeneration in America, the anonymous author catalogued the fame of 
American artists and writers to show that, among other virtues, ". . . the 
Americans appear to be possessed of peculiarly strong talents for paint­
ing." Needless to say, he went on, "The age of ultimate refinement in 
America, is yet to arrive. . . . Some pains ought, therefore, to be taken, to 
lead the taste of a nation to substitute, instead of the vulgar enjoyments 
of cock-fighting, gambling, and tavern haunting, pleasures of a more 
refined and innocent nature." Already, much improvement had been at­
tained, when comparisons were made with conditions before the war; 
increasing population and wealth would ". . . hereafter, undoubtedly, 
prove a source and incentive to improvements in music, architecture, 
gardening, sculpture, and other elegant arts."2 
The author of that article and many other magazine writers, orators, 
newspaper editors and letter writers predicted, called for, begged and 
demanded the immediate appearance of that "age of ultimate refinement 
in America." Finding no adequate response, they soon began to grumble 
about the lack of patronage and the philistinism of Americans. 
Scholars have generally found these criticisms to present a true bill, 
and American civilization generally stands indicted as one peculiarly 
lacking in aesthetic content. The American people prior to World War 
II seemed persistently indifferent to matters of taste more sophisticated 
than the daily newspaper, Currier and Ives prints, and Walt Disney car­
toons. The recent "culture boom," testified to and appraised in dra­
matically different terms by Alvin Toffler, Dwight Macdonald, and Tom 
Wolfe,3 apparently only reinforces the conventional judgment of Ameri­
can taste that existed before 1945. 
In this article I would like to suggest an alternative interpretation of 
American taste, arguing that there is substantial evidence to indicate 
that Americans have traditionally shown at least as much interest in the 
arts as the nations with which they have usually been invidiously com­
pared. Rather than documenting a clear-cut case against Americans for 
being philistines, it seems to me, the usual story of American indifference 
to the arts illustrates the persistence of the myth of The American Adam.4 
Conclusive refutation of the usual condemnation of American tastelessness
would require a definitive history of American attitudes and 
actions relevant to aesthetic topics, and scholars have yet to produce such 
a history. It should be sufficient here, however, to demonstrate how the 
94 
 major criticisms are either not based on facts or fail to read those facts 
correctly. 
Probably the most dominant illustration of American indifference to 
the arts is based on the belief that Americans have more or less con­
sistently ignored their own creative talents, at least until lionization in 
Europe brought a reluctant response in the United States. Thus, Frank 
Lloyd Wright received wide recognition throughout Europe by the sec­
ond decade of this century as a great architect while still finding few 
commissions and very little national recognition in his homeland. A 
century earlier the "distinguished amateur" (Benjamin Latrobe?) wrote 
his blast to the Observer enraged by the unresponsiveness of American 
builders to elegant architecture. "I wanted," he claimed, "to make plain 
to the eye and the finger of the American builder, that nothing was to be 
left to chance nor choice in composition, as well as in construction; and 
that grace, beauty and solidity, depend on the forms and proportions . . ." 
found by leading modern architects and engineers in the ruins of Greece, 
Rome, and Asia. "But when I recollected that we were in a country 
where cheapness was the only thing considered, . . . " and his projected 
book would, therefore, be confined to a dozen libraries from which pirat­
ing would have been unmerciful, he decided that Americans believed 
"ignorance is bliss." The aggrieved author consigned himself to resigned 
silence, " . . . for all that I see around me appears as far as concerns taste, 
to be condemned to final impenitence."5 The sympathetic handful shook 
their heads in dismay, as they would continue to do until the mid-twen­
tieth century. 
Obviously, most Americans most of the time have not attended to 
matters of taste, but this has probably been a constant in human psychol­
ogy. The accusation that Americans are indifferent to good taste depends 
on the argument that they have paid much less time and money and had 
proportionately far fewer patrons than Great Britain, France, or some 
other cultured European country. Consequently, they have consistently 
betrayed their destiny, enunciated by Benjamin Latrobe among many 
others: " . . . the days of Greece may be revived in the woods of America, 
and Philadelphia become the Athens of the Western world."6 
Latrobe, himself, repeatedly suffered from neglect, according to Tal­
bot Hamlin, his biographer, even though he was the first professionally 
trained architect to practice in America, and, undoubtedly, the leading 
designer in his generation. Hamlin summed up the theme of this "archi­
tectural biography as it should be written":7 
It is the story of a man ahead of his time . . . of how a coun­
try . . . would give to Latrobe's intense aesthetic vision 
merely the most superficial and grudging admiration. . . . 
The tragedy of a man devoted to the ideals of imaginative 
planning in a country where mere improvisation was still 
the rule.s 
95 
 Latrobe's life, in short, exemplified that of an architectural genius in 
" . . . a country widely permeated with a kind of basic anti-aestheticism."9 
For the disinterested reader, Hamlin's lament seems remarkably out 
of tune with the "rapid rise to fame that Latrobe experienced after 
arriving in Norfolk early in 1796. Before dying of yellow fever in NewT 
Orleans in 1820 he had secured his fame with such public structures as 
the Philadelphia waterworks, the Bank of Pennsylvania, the Catholic 
Cathedral at Baltimore, and his work on the Capitol and the White 
House in Washington. Latrobe designed many famous and beautiful 
homes, the best known being Henry Clay's Ashland, as well as such 
diverse pieces of engineering as the Delaware and Chesapeake Canal and 
steamboats in Pittsburgh. Connected through his second wife with the 
cream of Philadelphia society, he counted among his friends Thomas 
Jefferson and Dolly Madison. The architect would have achieved fortune 
as well as fame except for his naively generous impulses that led him to 
contribute his services all too often and to become ensnared in bank­
ruptcies, because "he never could bring himself to use the important 
monosyllable—No—when asked for his signature."10 Latrobe's life, I sub­
mit, is a prime example of the disparity between the facts and their mis­
use by critics alleging America's "anti-aestheticism." 
Too often, however, facts are simply not consulted. Alvin Toffler 
wrote The Culture Consumers ". . . to prove that since the end of the 
last World War a series of astonishing, and on the whole healthy, changes 
have transformed the social base of the arts in this country." That is to 
say, "the devotees of art have grown from a lonely handful to an army." 
He reemphasizes his denigration of pre-1945 American taste by insisting: 
"The American attitude toward the arts has completed a 180-degree turn 
since the end of World War II. From one of apathy, indifference, and 
even hostility, it has become one of eager, if sometimes ignorant, en­
thusiasm."11 He enthusiastically cited current statistics. Americans spent 
or donated "a rock-bottom minimum" of $3 billion in 1960 for culture, 
exclusive of public funds and business gifts, or 70% more than in 1950. 
A survey of 21 museums alone showed an aggregate attendance of 
19,370,000 in 1958, a figure that climbed to 21,360,000 two years later.12 
In the mass of statistics, however, Toffler did not trouble himself to 
go further back than the 1930's for comparative figures. 
One of Toffler's whipping boys, "the high priest of the art-for-elite 
ideology . . . that engaging gadfly, Dwight Macdonald,"13 lamented the 
rise of "mass-cult" indicated by statistics such as those enthusiastically 
quoted by Toffler. Macdonald's perspective in time and space was far 
greater than Toffler's: "Up to about 1750, art and thought were pretty 
much the exclusive province of an educated minority. Now that the 
masses—that is, everybody—are getting into the act and making the scene, 
the problem of vulgarization has become acute."14 Most of his account of 
the rise of the masses since 1750 focuses on Grub Street rather than 
96 
 Madison Avenue. Macdonald offered to his readers a confusing variety 
of "turning points" in American cultural development: The Civil War, 
which marked the destruction of the New England tradition, or, if one 
preferred, 1900, 1929, or 1945.15 Nevertheless, he ended up agreeing with 
Toffler that most of American history had been marked by indifference 
to the arts by most Americans. 
One further example of cultural myopia can be found in the extra­
ordinarily provocative essays by the young, rambunctious Tom Wolfe, 
collected in his revealingly-titled Kandy-Kolored Tangerine-Flake 
Streamline Baby. Where Toffler argued that the people are getting "Cul­
ture," and Macdonald asserted that this is ruining "Culture," Wolfe 
wrote vivid, enthusiastic accounts of a new proletarian civilization that 
includes neon signs as folk art; drag-racing, demolition races and custommade
cars as folk ritual; and Murray the K (disc-jockey on New York's 
WINS and American promoter of the Beatles) as folk prophet. Amaz­
ingly enough, Wolfe agreed with Macdonald that traditionally the aristo­
cratic few dominated the history of taste, apparently including the United 
States. He rather brutally summarized the essence of cultural history: 
Practically every style recorded in art history is the result of 
the same thing—a lot of attention to form, plus the money 
to make monuments to it. . . . But throughout history . . . it 
has been something the aristocracy has been responsible for. 
What has happened in the United States since World War 
II, however has broken that pattern. The war created 
money. It made massive infusions of money into every level 
of society. Suddenly classes of people whose styles of life 
had been practically invisible had the money to build the 
monuments to their own styles. 
This is why he felt justified in calling Las Vegas "the Versailles of Amer­
ica," built by gangsters who were the "first uneducated, prole-pettyburgher
Americans to have enough money to build a monument to their 
style of life."16 The title of his book actually derived from a custom-made 
car, but it might be used fairly enough to describe the new cultural order 
that he saw emerging. 
Of the thousands of commentators on the contemporary American 
scene it seems to make little difference whether one identifies with the 
upper middle class (Toffler wrote part of his Culture Consumers as 
articles in Fortune Magazine), the intellectual aristocracy, or the popu­
lisme public. A gross misunderstanding or misconception of the history 
of American taste generally prevails. All kinds of evidence come readily 
to hand if one really wants to find out the facts. James Flexner has effec­
tively argued, for example, that ". . . in the mid-nineteenth century, 
painting was more popular in America than at any other time in our 
history." Furthermore, "the interest was not inspired by the importation 
from abroad of already famous masters. The rage was for works of living 
97 
 American masters." For example, a New York exhibition devoted ex­
clusively to such pictures attracted from 1836 to 1861 an average annual 
attendance equal to 57i/2 per cent of the city population. By contrast, 
from 1936 to 1951 the attendance at the Metropolitan Museum was only 
an annual percentage of I614 per cent.17 
In the past few years several books have appeared studying earlier 
American popular taste, and, frequently, the research has mainly been in 
readily available books, magazines, and newspapers. Lillian Miller's 
study of Patrons and Patriotism1* implicitly refuted the contention that 
patronage was controlled by an aristocratic few. Interest in contem­
porary American painting and sculpture varied according to social con­
ditions—nationalistic northeasterners being far more eager than statesrights
minded southerners—but not according to class or gentility. The 
wealthiest and most genteel were just as pleased with Mount's genre 
paintings as were the "great unwashed." According to Neil Harris' 
Artist in American Society, the growing apologia for American art which, 
at least by 1860, had legitimized art in America, had to cope primarily 
with zealous and concerned moralists and nationalists who feared that 
artistic "luxury" would corrupt republican American "simplicity." Sheer 
indifference to matters of taste remained a distinctly minor concern. 
Again, the divisions amongst patrons, apologists and their opponents pre­
supposed a common interest in the arts, regardless of class or wealth.10 
Another scholar has made the point very clearly: 
No matter what it was conventional to proclaim in theory, 
in practice 'art' for most Americans has always meant the 
kind of values and social function inherent in popular arts 
and industrial design, and in order to survive and work 
American painters have had to take account of that fact, by 
incorporating a high degree of nationalism and popular 
Realism, and by retaining many traditional functions of 
communication and entertainment which in Europe were 
early surrendered to 'commercial art.'20 
As the author, Alan Gowans, goes on to say, nothing but trouble came to 
artists who refused to comply with those dictates, but this concern will 
be taken up later. 
Documentation showing the misunderstanding of American taste 
entertained by such people as Toffler, Macdonald, and Wolfe could be 
continued far beyond the limits of this article. Take up, for example, 
Margaret Thorp's study of mid-nineteenth century American sculptors,21 
certainly one of the most poorly-supported groups of American artists, 
working in one of the least lively media and styles—neo-classical sculpture. 
It is impossible to find any starving artists in neglected garrets. Larkin 
Mead, hopeful sculptor clerking in a Brattleboro, Vermont, hardware 
store, only had to make a snow statue that won headlines, and Nicholas 
Longworth, the wealthy and generous Cincinnati patron, took him in 
98 
 hand, sending him to Florence to study.22 One gains the impression that 
the last thing an American neo-classical sculptor could do was to retain 
poverty and anonymity. 
Allegedly the most barren of all architectural periods in America, 
immortalized in Lewis Mumford's Brown Decades,2* has finally begun to 
gain some recognition for its daring, ebullient, and often charming eclec­
ticism. John Maass even argued that, "the truth is that an enormously 
creative and progressive era produced an enormously creative and pro­
gressive architecture/'24 
Pushed to the wall by such facts, partisans insisting on American 
tastelessness will deny that it is a matter of money and popularity. 
Rather, they argue, the whole cultural climate is too stark and severe. 
Who has not heard or read Hawthorne's plaint in his "Preface" to The 
Marble Faun} 
No author, without a trial, can conceive of the difficulty of 
writing a romance about a country where there is no shad­
ow, no antiquity, no mystery, no picturesque and gloomy 
wrong, nor anything but a commonplace prosperity, in 
broad and simple daylight, as is happily the case with my 
dear native land. . . . Romance and poetry, ivy, lichens, and 
wall-flowers, need ruin to make them grow.25 
Adapted to fit the various artistic media—the painter must go to Europe 
to find beautiful landscapes, the sculptor could find only in Italy ade­
quate marble and trained workmen, and so on—Hawthorne's critique has 
frequently been heard from emotionally or physically expatriated Amer­
ican artists. 
Even when such an attitude has become terribly out of fashion, a 
powerful variation on the theme of incompatible environment has been 
that, far from being indifferent to the arts, Americans veritably smother 
their artists with adulation. A classic statement of this position may be 
found in Henry James' reflective biography of Nathaniel Hawthorne. 
Considering the social milieu in which the young Hawthorne started out 
to make a career of literature, James noted that the major difficulty 
would not be lack of recognition, since ". . . literature and the arts have 
always been held in extreme honor in the American world, and those 
who practice them are received on easier terms than in other countries." 
In fact, one of the most salient aspects of American provinciality turns 
out to be ". . . this matter of the exaggerated homage rendered to 
authorship." It greatly harmed the artist's work, James concluded, by 
bringing about ". . . an admiration too indiscriminating to operate as an 
encouragement to good writing." The artists can scarcely avoid ". . . the 
suspicion that is mingled with his gratitude, of a want in the public 
taste of a sense of the proportions of things."26 It almost seems that 
Americans stand condemned for ignoring their native artists and also for 
failing to restrain their celebration of them. 
99 
 It certainly would be excessive pleading to deny that some great 
American artists have suffered long and lonely years of poverty, obscurity, 
and even calumny. Both Louis Sullivan and Frank Lloyd Wright 
marched through a long, lean desert of years, Sullivan dying in drunken 
despair, Wright finally achieving lasting fame and prosperity. There 
were extenuating circumstances, as is usually the case. They and their 
fellow architectural rebels against what they considered the prevailing 
corrupt and utterly sterile academicism demanded much of potential 
clients, too much for most as it turned out. As Alan Gowans put it, they 
had ". . . so little specific or conscious understanding of what they were 
ultimately doing, and in consequence presented their ideas with such 
confusion and inconsistency.'5 They saw themselves as harbingers and 
prophets, but 
No wonder the 'rebels' found acceptance of their views slow 
and difficult. Who wanted to be associated with such con­
ceited visionaries? . . . In short, considering the contempo­
rary reputations of early modern architects generally, their 
arrogance seemed to most people at the time not merely 
inexplicable, but, when not patently ridiculous, unfor­
givable.27 
Americans have certainly had great difficulty accepting artists who 
claimed for themselves godlike powers of restructuring the whole nation's 
way of life. Even today a periodical self-consciously devoted to support 
American art sometimes finds the latest wave of "rebels" hard to swal­
low.28 
The point at issue, however, is whether Americans have been un­
usually reluctant to accept the latest wave of artistic creativity. The 
remarkable fact about the litany chanting American indifference or hos­
tility to matters of taste is that, without exception, the adherents of this 
view feel no great need to make comparisons between the American 
record and that of Britain or France or Italy. It is simply taken for 
granted that the United States has always been uncongenial to art. In 
other words, like a litany, this attitude is more a ritual than a statement 
of facts, and the ritual refers to and celebrates an encompassing faith. 
In effect, John Kouwenhoven has maintained, the substance of the 
faith has been directed to "ART," conceived as a collection of Old 
Masters worshipfully admired in a museum. Consequently, no attention 
is given to the new, American aesthetic, combining democracy and in­
dustrialism in what Kouwenhoven called the "vernacular tradition," to 
be seen in our machinery, jazz, the balloon-frame house, and a thousand 
other manifestations. Opera and poetic drama are bewailed for their 
moribund state, while George Gershwin's Porgy and Bess is dismissed as 
"merely" a musical.29 James Jackson Jarves, a century earlier, argued a 
similar case, dedicated as he was to the elevation of popular taste. Most 
Americans, he observed, tended to view art as ". . . something above and 
100 
 apart from themselves." This and the lack of informed criticism resulted 
in a deluge of "bad, mechanical work." Architects foolishly copied the 
forms of Greek or Gothic buildings without understanding or even 
caring for the spirit that made them appropriate for their time and place. 
On the other hand, the demands of merchants and home-owners had 
produced " . . . a restless, inquiring, experimenting spirit, approaching 
the inventive in our building. . . ." Already, Jarves could find ". . . solid 
and handsome blocks of stores, in more or less good taste, appropriate to 
their purpose, effective as street-architecture, and novel in many of their 
features."30 
The interpretation of Jarves and Kouwenhoven helps to explain why 
there has been so much misinformed criticism of American taste, but it 
fails to get to the root of the matter. We have had a vigorous opera- and 
concert-life in America for a long time,31 with many enthusiastic regulars 
like Walt Whitman. Why has this been so ignored? 
It seems to me that the litany of dispraise has functioned as a struc­
tural support for what is variously called the myth of the American 
Adam, our messianic vision of creating "A City On A Hill,"32 or the 
faith in American innocence. Every American schoolchild knows that 
the Pilgrims and Puritans (generally thought to be synonymous) and 
most later immigrants to America came to get away from tyrannical, 
corrupt, irreligious, and decadent Europe. Daniel Boorstin has made the 
very important point that American identity has traditionally been de­
fined negatively in relation to Europe: that will be essentially American 
which is not-European.33 An obvious part of the European heritage was 
a richly elaborated artistic tradition. Since Americans aimed to cleanse 
politics of European tyranny, social life of European decadence, and 
economic life of the European dichotomy between great wealth for the 
few and terrible poverty for the many, it seemed irresistible to purify 
European art. Yet, as Neil Harris so succinctly phrased it: "Art, unlike 
politics, never became an instrument to cleanse other nations' corrup­
tions; the physical weight of the European visual heritage and the con­
tinued strength of its contemporary achievement proved altogether too 
intimidating for this form of salvationism."34 If it could not be detached 
from its repugnant European affiliations—aristocratic patronage and im­
moral paintings of nude women, for example—then art must be avoided 
entirely. The assertion of American indifference to the arts, in short, 
played a parallel role to the belief that social classes were nonexistent in 
the United States, or to the rags-to-riches myth. Just as the admission 
that classes did exist or that poor kids would have a very difficult time 
making their fortune, so the recognition of a vigorous and extensive sup­
port for art would seriously undermine our national vision. Only re­
cently, when the American Adam has died an unnoticed death,35 when 
our nation has lost its innocence,36 and when we doubt the exportability 
of the "American way of life,"37 only then could Americans view without 
101 
 despair our social class structure, our less than perfect economic vertical 
mobility and our taste for the arts. 
The rationale for excluding serious attention to art—or rather, the 
denial that such attention played any important role in Americaachieved
clarity within a few years after the Declaration of Independ­
ence. John Adams, making notes while touring English country seats 
with Thomas Jefferson in the spring of 1786, conceded that "Architec­
ture, Painting, Statuary, Poetry are all employed in the Embellishment 
of these Residences of Greatness and Luxury/' Significantly, however, 
his next sentence took away any merit this might have had for Ameri­
cans: "A national Debt of 274 millions sterling accumulated by Jobs, 
Contracts, Salaries and Pensions in the Course of a Century might easily 
produce all this magnificence." Clearly, grandiose architectural monu­
ments were inseparable from corrupt government and society. Far better, 
Adams concluded, to take pleasure in the natural beauties of our own 
land; 
It will be long, I hope before Ridings, Parks, Pleasure 
Grounds, Gardens and ornamented Farms grow so much in 
fashion in America. But Nature has done greater things 
and furnished nobler Materials there. The Oceans, Islands, 
Rivers, Mountains, Valleys are all laid out upon a larger 
scale.38 
Soon this refrain would be picked up by authors of American magazine 
articles.39 It has since provided the basis for the Hudson River School 
of painting, the widespread backing for creation of parks and even the 
preservation or creation of wilderness areas.40 
Americans toured Europe with increasing frequency as the nineteenth 
century wore on, and the periodicals frequently published their letters 
for the delectation of those who had to stay home. The tourists paid a 
great deal of attention to the artistic masterworks on their itinerary. 
Frequently, this produced converts to artistic culture who returned to 
America, urging improvements in American taste and art production.41 
For the makers of the myth that Americans were indifferent to art, how­
ever, the tourist pilgrimage to European artistic shrines seemed only to 
be a vacation from everyday American reality. As temporary refuges of 
culture from the bustling world of urban growth and westward expan­
sion, these places could be enjoyed for a time and then abandoned. Rome 
was beautiful, of course, but also dirty, politically unstable, and filled 
with beggars.42 The disreputable accoutrements to great art, the argu­
ment ended, made it best for Americans to keep clearly in mind the 
unbridgeable distinction between art in Europe and life in America. 
This may well account for the seemingly incompatible major themes of 
American fictionists treating Italy, the innocent American girl exposed 
to pernicious influences on foreign soil and the Garden of Eden.43 The 
former served notice on Americans foolishly planning to stay abroad; 
102 
 the latter represented Italy as a vacation spot. Much as Thomas Jefferson 
loved the arts and admired the French people, he firmly believed that 
". . . every step we take towards the adoption of their manners is a step 
to perfect misery." Even to obtain one's education in Europe hazarded 
disaster: "It appears to me, then, that an American coming to Europe 
for education, loses in his knowledge, in his morals, in his health, in his 
habits, and in his happiness."44 
America remained the "land of the free, home of the brave," where 
one could enjoy liberty and all the beauties of God's creation. Ralph 
Waldo Emerson assured his countrymen: "A work of art is an abstract 
or epitome of the world. It is the result or expression of nature, in minia­
ture."45 Those last two words, for a people notoriously impressed by 
sheer size, ought to have served as the kiss of death to his listeners and 
readers. Henry David Thoreau dismissed as "such trifling" the "monu­
ments of the West and the East."46 Walt Whitman, of course, chimed in 
with his "barbaric yawp," singing his "Song of the Open Road." It is 
little wonder that commentators and scholars have taken America's 
spokesmen at their word, thereby continuing the myth of American 
indifference to art. 
Certainly the myth can not be maintained today. When it is casually 
taken to be obvious that New York is one of the art capitals of the world, 
perhaps the most important one,47 a re-examination of the role of art in 
American life is past due. Indeed, the appearance of some of the books 
cited above, especially those by Gowans, Harris and Miller, evidence 
(hopefully) an increasing concern to fill in the details pertinent to the 
history of American taste. But unless we are aware of the lingering power 
of popular mythology the effort will be in danger of turning into a 
scholarly sweeping back of the sea. Difficult as it will be to gain sufficient 
competence in art and cultural history and to stand sufficiently outside 
prevalent distorting assumptions, students of American civilization must 
make the effort. We have become, almost willy-nilly, cultural and artistic 
leaders of the world. Americans must refocus their ideas about them­
selves if the facts of our cultural life are to be understood in their proper 
context. 
Idaho Bicentennial Commission 
footnotes 
1. "D . , " "The Fine Arts: Extract of a letter from a distinguished amateur in Philadelphia, 
January 10, 1807," Observer (February 28, 1807), 131-133; [Eliza Anderson], "Music," Ibid. 
(May 23, 1807), 333-334. 
2. "Thoughts on American Genius," The New Haven Gazette and Connecticut Magazine 
(February 1, 1787), 380-381; reprinted in The American Museum or Repository (March, 1787), 
209-211. 
3. Alvin Toffler, The Culture Consumers: Art and Affluence in America (Baltimore, 1965); 
Dwight Macdonald, Against the American Grain: Essays on the Effects of Mass Culture (New 
York, 1962); Tom Wolfe, The Kandy-Kolored Tangerine-Flake Streamline Baby (New York, 
1966). 
103 
 4. See, for example, R. W. B. Lewis, The American Adam: Innocence, Tragedy, and 
Tradition in the Nineteenth Century (Chicago, 1955). 
5. Observer (February 28, 1807), 131-133. 
6. Benjamin Henry Latrobe, Anniversary Discourse before the Society of Artists, May 8, 
1811, printed in The Port Folio, V (1811), Appendix. 
7. Review by Rexford Newcomb, Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, XV, 
1 (December, 1956), 29-30. 
8. Talbot Hamlin, Benjamin Henry Latrobe (New York, 1955), xix. 
9. Ibid., 142. 
10. Ibid., 338. For a further discussion of Latrobe's professional life, see J. Meredith Neil, 
"The Precarious Professionalism of Latrobe," AIA Journal, LUI , 5 (May, 1970), 67-71. 
11. Toffler, Culture Consumers, 11, 15, 21. 
12. Ibid., 24, 25. 
13. Ibid., 13. 
14. Macdonald, Against the American Grain, ix. 
15. Ibid., 34, 36, 53, 58. 
16. Wolf, The Kandy-Kolored Tangerine-Flake Streamline Baby, xiv, xvi. 
17. James T . Flexner, That Wilder Image: The Painting of America's Native School from 
Thomas Cole to Winslow Homer (Boston, 1962), xi. 
18. Lillian B. Miller, Patrons and Patriotism: The Encouragement of the Fine Arts in the 
United States, 1790-1860 (Chicago, 1966). 
19. Neil Harris, The Artist in American Society: The Formative Years, 1790-1860 (New 
York, 1966). 
20. Alan Gowans, The Restless Art: A History of Painters and Painting, 1760-1960 (Phila­
delphia and New York, 1966), 385. Professor Gowans has developed his interpretation in The 
Unchanging Arts: New Forms for the Traditional Functions of Art in Society (Philadelphia 
and New York, 1971). 
21. Margaret F. Thorp, The Literary Sculptors (Durham, N.C., 1965). 
22. Ibid., 192. 
23. Lewis Mumford, The Brown Decades: A Study of the Arts in America, 1865-1895 (New 
York, 1955 [1931]). 
24. John Maass, The Gingerbread Age: A View of Victorian America (New York, 1957), 8. 
25. Norman H. Pearson (éd.), The Complete Novels and Selected Tales of Nathaniel Haw­
thorne (New York, 1937), 590. 
26. Henry James, Hawthorne, contained in Edmund Wilson, The Shock of Recognition: 
The Development of Literature in the United States Recorded by the Men Who Made It (New 
York, 1955 [1943]), I, 450. 
27. Alan Gowans, Images of American Living: Four Centuries of Architecture and Furni­
ture as Cultural Expression (Philadelphia and New York, 1964), 414-417. For an excellent 
case study, see Leonard K. Eaton, Two Chicago Architects and Their Clients: Frank Lloyd 
Wright and Howard Van Doren Shaw (Cambridge, Mass., 1969). 
28. See, for example, Francois Dallegret, "The Future: Desertomania," Art in America, 
LV, 4 (July-August, 1967), 32-39. 
29. John A. Kouwenhoven, Made in America: The Arts in Modern Civilization (Newton 
Centre, Mass., 1957 [1948]), especially 267-268. 
30. James Jackson Jarves, The Art-Idea (edited by Benjamin Rowland, Jr.) (Cambridge, 
Mass., 1960 [1864]), 152, 154, 240, 242. 
31. See, for example, the evidence in O. G. Sonneck, Early Concert-Life in America (17511800)
(New York, 1949). 
32. Loren Baritz, City on a Hill: A History of Ideas and Myths in America (New York, 
1964). 
33. Daniel Boorstin, America and the Image of Europe: Reflections on American Thought 
(New York, 1960), 19-39. 
34. Harris, The Artist in American Society, 24. 
35. Lewis, The American Adam, 195-198: ". . . the American as Adam has been replaced by 
the American as Laocoon; the Emersonian figure—'the plain old Adam, the simple genuine 
self—has been frowned quite out of existence." 
36. See, for example, Leslie Fiedler, An End to Innocence: Essays on Culture and Politics 
(Boston, 1955); and Henry F. May, The End of American Innocence: A Study of the First 
Years of Our Own Time, 1912-1917 (New York, 1959). 
37. Daniel Boorstin, The Genius of American Politics (Chicago, 1953), Chapter VI: "Our 
Cultural Hypochondria and How to Cure I t , " 161-189. 
38. John Adams, Diary and Autobiography (Cambridge, Mass., 1961), I I I , 185-186. 
39. See, for example, "Philoenthusiasticus," "Reflections on America," The Massachusetts 
Magazine, or Monthly Museum (December, 1795), 559-560; "W.," " T h e Cynic, No. 5: Rural 
Felicity," The Philadelphia Repository and Weekly Register (July 31, 1802), 300-301; "A.W.," 
"Reflections on Spring," Philadelphia Repository (May 21, 1803), 163-164. 
104 
 40. Especially interesting is Roderick Nash, "The American Cult of the Primitive," Ameri­
can Quarterly, XVIII, 3 (Fall, 1966), 520-537, and his book, Wilderness and the American 
Mind (New Haven, 1967). 
41. Harris, The Artist in American Society, 124-169. 
42. Paul Baker, The Fortunate Pilgrims: Americans in Italy, 1800-1860 (Cambridge, Mass., 
1964), 198-222. This attitude can be seen throughout Mark Twain's letters that later evolved 
into Innocents Abroad. See Daniel M. McKeithan (éd.), Traveling with the Innocents Abroad: 
Mark Twain's Original Reports from Europe and the Holy Land (Norman, Okla., 1958). 
43. Nathalia Wright, American Novelists in Italy: The Discoverers, Allston to James 
(Philadelphia, 1965), 29-33, 250-256. 
44. Quoted in Philip Rahv (éd.), Discovery of Europe: The Story of American Experience 
in the Old World (Garden City, N.Y., 1960 [1947]), 57, 59-61. 
45. "Nature ," in Selected Prose and Poetry (edited, with an Introduction by Reginald L. 
Cook) (New York, 1950), 14. 
46. Walden, in Walden and Other Writings (edited, with an introduction by Brooks 
Atkinson) (New York, 1950), 52. A similar attitude towards the past may be found in Emer­
son, "The Poet," in Selected Prose and Poetry, 316-340. 
47. Merely one of innumerable examples may be found in Edward F. Fry, "Sculpture of the 
Sixties," Art in America, LV, 5 (September-October, 1967), 26-43. 
105 
