american science 
comes of age 
an institutional 
perspective, 1850-1930 
hamilton cravens 
By the 1930's America indisputably had "come of age" in international 
science. America was the critical center of the world's scientific research. 
American scientists did perhaps the lion's share of the world's scientific 
work—and won consistent recognition for the quality of their work, as 
America's shift from fourth to first place in Nobel science laureates in 
the 1930's suggests.1 In a special issue focused on long-term changes in 
American society and culture, the question of America's rise to inter­
national leadership in science is appropriate to pose. Yet students of 
American culture and science have discovered that it is far easier to 
agree upon the fact of America's rise to world power in science by the 
1930's than to explain the phenomenon. We can cull two explanations 
from the scholarly literature. In 1948 Richard H. Shryock advanced the 
"indifference thesis." Shryock insisted that nineteenth century Amer­
icans were "indifferent" to basic scientific research; consequently Amer­
ica's contributions to basic science lagged behind Europe's. In the 
twentieth century basic science came into its own in American culture; 
now business leaders supported basic scientific research because in­
dustrial technology demonstrated the social and economic benefits of 
basic research.2 More recently several historians of nineteenth century 
American science have criticized the indifference thesis.3 And although 
they do not agree on many substantive issues, their work has left the 
impression (however unintentionally) that the origins of modern Amer­
ican scientific leadership lay in institutional and intellectual develop­
ments in the ante-bellum era—such as the development of scientific 
professionalization, of national scientific institutions and of "mature" 
research communities.4 
49 
 Each explanation, moreover, raises special difficulties. The indif­
ference thesis posits inappropriate comparisons between nineteenth 
century American and European culture. And it rests on unprovable 
assumptions; is it really demonstrable, for example, that most Americans 
have been less "indifferent" to basic science in the twentieth than in the 
nineteenth century? And since much basic research has had relatively 
little industrial or economic application, Shryock's argument appears 
highly questionable. The historians of ante-bellum American science 
are probably closer to the mark when they stress the importance of 
developments within the scientific community. Yet this view overlooks 
the fundamental changes in science after the mid-nineteenth century, 
the radical discontinuities in the culture of science, in the ideas of 
science, which drastically raised the standards for participation in 
scientific research. In the nineteenth century scientific disciplines grew 
in many ways: new sciences and sub-sciences emerged; higher mathe­
matics became an integral part of the physical sciences; new skills, instru­
ments and techniques became important to the natural sciences, and, 
in most fields, grand paradigms crystallized. The modern sciences were 
taking shape as distinct intellectual structures, a complex development 
that began, haltingly, in the eighteenth century, but which in the 
nineteenth century gathered new momentum. The fragmentation and 
multiplication of disciplines occasioned also an enormous information 
explosion which mandated specialization and professionalization—the 
ability to identify with a particular area as an inquirer and as a person 
with a full-time science-related career. And the number of investigators 
in the sciences mushroomed, contributing to an information explosion. 
It was probably not until after the ante-bellum era that the full effects 
of these internal developments began to alter the groundrules for partici­
pating in the culture of science; and correspondingly, these internal 
changes in science required a new set of institutional arrangements in 
post-Appomattox America. 
i 
Thus in the sixty years between John Dalton's atomic theory and 
Mendeleev's periodical table chemistry became a distinct science (and 
an identifiable research community) fully independent of natural philos­
ophy with its subdivisions of organic and inorganic chemistry—and more 
finite areas of chemical knowledge. By the 1860's and 1870's modern 
physics was emerging as both a recognizable discipline and a community 
of physics researchers, thanks to the work of such men as Faraday, Max­
well, Kelvin, Stokes, Joule, Henry and others; and physics' subspecialties 
—electricity, magnetism, optics, astronomy, for example—had acquired 
so much new information and so many new methods that each had its 
own distinct research community. In the nineteenth century the earth 
sciences, now autonomous from other sciences, underwent an elaborate 
50 
 sequence of inner changes, aided by the explanatory power of the uniformitarian
hypothesis and the development of such specialties as ter­
restrial magnetism, meteorology and geodesy. And in the nineteenth 
century natural history fragmented into many new disciplines, such as 
anatomy, botany, zoology, physiology and ethnology (and such exotic 
specialties as oology, ornithology, mammology and paleontology) which 
stood for vast new quantities of information, new skills—and distinct 
groups of specialists.5 
The intellectual revolution within nineteenth century science made 
specialization imperative by the late nineteenth century. Specialization 
mandated a host of innovations in scientific institutions which would 
enable the researcher-specialist to receive appropriately cosmopolitan 
training, to communicate regularly with other specialists and to pursue 
an occupation related to his or her scientific work. Specialization and 
the information explosion made it increasingly difficult, as the nine­
teenth century wore on, for an individual to keep abreast unless that 
individual held a scientific position; this was even more true in those 
disciplines which became experimental, for experimentation demanded 
not merely time, but also the physical, the financial and the human 
resources of the laboratory. In turn specialization also implied, not 
simply the creation of science-related occupations, or the founding and 
funding of laboratories, libraries, and the like, but a host of new institu­
tional arrangements that would guarantee universalistic scientific stand­
ards of training, competence and performance, and, in institutional 
terms, the continued development of specialized research communities 
whose members could directly determine the circumstances of their work. 
Above all, these institutional arrangements necessitated the creation of 
a new social role for the scientist in American society—the trained, spe­
cialized researcher who could continue to participate in, contribute to, 
and assume leadership in, the work of his or her international scientific 
colleagues.6 
I suggest that the clues to America's rise to world power in science 
are located in the character of American scientific and educational insti­
tutions in particular historical epochs—those epochs which were them­
selves defined, for our purposes, by the intellectual revolution of nine­
teenth century science. In turn those scientific institutions were tangible 
responses to changes American scientists perceived in the structures and 
processes of nineteenth century science. Most critical to our under­
standing is the social role of the scientist which American scientific insti­
tutions created in response to the internal changes in contemporary 
science. Before the later nineteenth century, before specialization and 
professionalization were virtually mandatory, American scientific institu­
tions helped shape a particular social role for the scientist which distin­
guished between those persons who were interested in participating in 
the culture of science, as compared with those who were not, and thus 
51 
 drew a line between the scientist, on the one hand, and the man of 
letters or the clergyman, the manufacturer and the farmer on the other. 
But the social role of the ante-bellum scientist could not distinguish 
between the specialized researcher who sought original knowledge and 
the generalist student of nature fascinated by nature's mysteries. Indeed, 
it was only in the 1840's that the terms "scientist" and "man of science" 
were coined and came into common usage in America. Yet in midcentury
America there were so few researchers and so little demand for 
their skills and services that they had to include within their ranks both 
specialized researchers such as Joseph Henry and transcendentalists and 
students of nature such as Henry David Thoreau—as Thoreau's reaction 
to an invitation to join the fledgling American Association for the 
Advancement of Science, below, shows. Only with such an inclusionary 
definition of scientist could ante-bellum scientific institutions function.7 
Thoreau's "poor part" 
March 5 1853 . . . . The secretary of the American Association for the Advance­
ment of Science requests me, as he probably has thousands of others, by a 
printed circular letter from Washington the other day, to fill the blank against 
certain questions, among which the most important one was what branch of 
science I was most especially interested in, using the term science in the most 
comprehensive sense possible. Now, though I could state to a select few that 
department of human inquiry which engages me, and should be rejoiced at 
any opportunity to do so, I felt that it would be to make myself the laughing­
stock of the scientific community to describe or attempt to describe to them 
that branch of science which deals with the higher law. So I was obliged to 
speak to their condition and describe to them that poor part of me which alone 
they can understand. The fact is I am a mystic, a transcendentalist, and a 
natural philosopher to boot. Now I think of it, I should have told them at 
once that I was a transcendentalist. That would have been the shortest 
way of telling them that they would not understand my explanations. 
Quoted in Perry Miller, éd., The American Transcendentalists: Their Prose 
and Poetry (Garden City, N.Y., 1957), 1-2. Thoreau refers to the volume Ad­
dresses of Scientific Men [circa 1853, Spencer F. Baird Papers, Smithsonian In­
stitution Archives, Washington, D.C.], which Baird, acting as secretary of the 
new AAAS, used to try to create an address-book of all possible scientists who 
in turn would be a national constituency for the Association. This illustrates 
the necessary imprecision of the concept—and hence the role—of the scientist 
in ante-bellum America. 
By the later nineteenth century the continuing intellectual revolu­
tion of science made unworkable the ante-bellum social role of the 
American scientist. A severe crisis was at hand. Correspondingly a new 
system of scientific and educational institutions—centered in the new 
graduate universities—emerged and thus created a new social role for 
the American scientist more appropriate for the demands of contem­
porary science: the trained, specialized researcher who identified in52

 tellectually and occupationally professionally with a particular disci­
pline. The incredible internal changes of nineteenth century science, 
now so evident, mandated scientific professionalization in specific disci­
plines as the minimum institutional prerequisite of further American 
participation in scientific culture. That such institutional innovations 
could and did occur at the nineteenth century's close provided aspiring 
American scientists with new and unparalleled opportunities for inter­
national scientific leadership—thanks to the novel possibilities created 
by the institutional changes which came with the arrival of a new 
epoch in American cultural history. 
The years 1825-1860 marked a definite watershed in the institutional 
history of American science. Before the ante-bellum epoch, there was 
no organized, self-sustaining scientific community identifiable in Amer­
ican culture; no clear distinction between general cultural institutions 
and generically scientific institutions; no evident demarcation between 
the cultured gentleman and the man of science; no conspicuously Amer­
ican centers of scientific inquiry; and, for that matter, no large body of 
American scientific discoveries.8 By 1860 much had changed, institu­
tionally and intellectually—and rather against strong trends in the 
larger society. In an era of retrogression for most colleges, a handful of 
Northeastern colleges imported the latest European science, installed it 
prominently in their curricula and appointed many professors of science. 
In a time of increasing popularity for laissez-faire public policies, gov­
ernments began employing scientists regularly for scientific projects. In 
a period notable for mass evangelical movements in religion and stern 
practicality in business, private philanthropists endowed scientific re­
search institutions and provided research funds for individual scientists. 
In an epoch allegedly characterized by widespread social and institu­
tional disorganization, distinctively scientific societies and journals were 
founded—and often survived. In a day supposedly dominated by 
romanticism and religious enthusiasm, some Americans made empirical 
contributions to international science. And in an age of the "common 
man" and supposed public distrust of elites, a recognizable scientific 
community, distinct from other cultural groups, emerged. Indeed, the 
institutional revolutions in higher education, in government, in philan­
thropy and in scientific societies interacted upon each other in complex 
ways to shape a recognizable social role for the ante-bellum American 
scientist. Each group of institutions—the colleges, government, philan­
thropy and scientific organizations—defined and redefined the Amer­
ican scientist's social role in various yet ultimately similar ways. As 
might have been expected in a formative era, specialized researchers 
necessarily shared power, authority and control of scientific institutions 
with those who merely consumed scientific culture—with trustees, presi53

 dents and alumni in the colleges, with elected and appointed officials in 
government, with non-scientist patrons of research and with such culti­
vators and consumers of scientific knowledge as Thoreau. 
Consider the social role that fifteen Northeastern liberal arts colleges 
created for American scientists between 1825 and 1860. These colleges 
made contemporary science one-third of their curricula, quadrupled 
their science faculty from one to four men each and purchased expensive 
instruments, specimens and books, thus exposing about half of Amer­
ica's college students to the latest scientific knowledge and giving that 
knowledge a firm institutional base in American culture. The colleges 
institutionalized the explosion of disciplines and information. After 
1815 Samuel Latham Mitchill at Columbia, Benjamin Silliman, Sr., at 
Yale and the chemistry professors at the Pennsylvania, Harvard and 
Columbia medical schools rapidly imported the era's new chemical 
knowledge—for example, Dalton's atomic theory. By the 1830's the col­
leges taught chemistry apart from the natural philosophy course—half as 
a year's offering. In the 1840's the colleges had laboratories, apparatus 
and full-time specialized chemistry professors.9 The colleges also carried 
forward the work of pioneer American geologists, notably Mitchill, 
Silliman, Parker Cleaveland, William Maclure and the American Geo­
logical Society's other members.10 In the 1830's many of these colleges 
offered distinct geology courses, complete with mineral cabinets; Amer­
ican geology professors now published their own uniformitarian texts— 
most notably Amherst professor Edward Hitchcock's Elementary Geology 
(1840), which passed through thirty editions by I860.11 After 1830 these 
colleges installed higher mathematics through calculus and abandoned 
natural philosophy texts of the 1780's for contemporary texts in physics 
and its subdivisions. New mathematics, physics and astronomy became 
separate courses. The colleges fortified astronomy by purchasing expen­
sive modern equipment from Europe.12 And in the 1840's the fifteen 
colleges dropped the one-year natural history course for separate offerings 
in its various branches,13 thus responding to both the information ex­
plosion about North America's flora and fauna evidenced in a growing 
number of natural history volumes which Americans published,14 and 
to the arrival from Europe of new theories, methods and instruments— 
for example, the cell theory of Schleiden and Schwann, intricate systems 
of classification and the compound microscope.15 Obviously these col­
leges both diffused and preserved European science. 
If these colleges largely created and institutionalized the social role 
of the professor of science, they did not create our modern role of uni­
versity specialist-researcher. The ante-bellum science professor's role or 
job, even in the best institutions, was to teach undergraduates. Original 
investigation he could do only outside his jot)—or, more precisely, out­
side his institutional role—on his own, for essentially personal rather 
than institutional reasons.16 The ante-bellum science professors did have 
54 
 a science-related career, but in virtually every instance they carried 
crushing teaching burdens. Some overcame the obstacles and published 
original work. Joseph Henry wrote forty-six of his most important 
papers while teaching heavy loads at Princeton, and Spencer F. Baird 
contributed a large number of ornithological contributions while teach­
ing over six contact hours a day at Dickinson College.17 Such achieve­
ments were testimony to personal drive, discipline and ability, not to 
the institutional role which these men and most ante-bellum college 
professors of science necessarily played. Only the famous Swiss naturalist 
Louis Agassiz taught under circumstances resembling those of a modern 
university professor of science—and precisely because of a personal at­
tribute, his international reputation.18 In a different way this suggests 
again that it was not a part of the institutional role of the ante-bellum 
college professor to be an independent specialist-researcher. Those who 
did did so because of their personal circumstances. Professors were 
employees, subject to the power of presidents and trustees, without 
academic freedom, tenure, rank and the other attributes of professional 
autonomy associated with the modern university professor. In the ante­
bellum college, unless personal factors intervened, much of the formal 
institutional power lay not with the scientists but with nonscientists. 
In general outline the social role governments created for scientists 
was much the same as in the colleges. Laymen, not scientists, defined 
the scientist's role; laymen held ultimate power—and much direct 
authority too, for that matter. In government as in the colleges scientists 
were employees far more than they were independent professionals. Ap­
pointed and elected public officials called the tune. Thus while Spencer 
F. Baird was quietly lobbying to win appointment as Assistant Secretary 
of the Smithsonian Institution, James D. Dana, one of his friends and 
supporters in the scientific community, told Baird that " . . . a word from 
a Political [sic] man is perhaps quite as important as from Scientific, 
[sic] since much depends on favor in all Washington appointments."19 
In an age often characterized by spoils politics, moreover, the politicians' 
power over government science and thus the scientist's role in govern­
ment went further than initial appointments. Responding to various 
citizen and special interest pressures, politicians also shaped the missions 
of governmental scientific enterprises, except in those instances in which 
the scientists themselves possessed the personal and political gifts that 
would enable them to transcend their employee-dependent status within 
the enterprise and influence policies by persuading the politicians who 
controlled the pursestrings. In other words, in government as in the 
colleges the scientist's personal attributes mattered as much as his scien­
tific competence, if not more, in allowing him to rise above the clearly 
defined institutional role of dependent employee and function as an 
autonomous scientific expert. The social role of the ante-bellum scientist 
did not really include the modern concept of the scientist as the 
authoritative specialist to be taken on his own terms. 
55 
 Consider the social role of the scientist in the state geological surveys. 
In the 1830's sixteen states sponsored geological surveys, in the 1840's 
another five did, and in the 1850's another fourteen, including eight for 
the first time. The surveys provided many geologists with invaluable 
opportunities to acquire skills, hold science-related jobs and develop a 
professional geology subculture. The surveys themselves varied widely 
in the quality of work done, the balance between applied and basic 
work, and in their institutional size and financial security. In the last 
respect the critical factor was always the political relationship between 
the geologists and the legislators.20 The New York survey, authorized in 
1836, was perhaps the largest and most successful in an institutional 
sense, employing eight full-time geologists, a full-time botanist, a fulltime
zoologist and several assistants, all of whom did respectable scien­
tific work, much of it noncommercial in its implications. Director James 
Hall was a brilliant lobbyist in the New York Assembly, persuading the 
solons to keep the survey going a decade past its termination date. The 
survey used about half a million dollars—a bonanza for science.21 Geol­
ogists could and did do basic research on the sly, especially if they 
presented a parsimonious front to legislators, as Edward Hitchcock did 
for Massachusetts.22 But proper political stroking was always indis­
pensable, as the example of the Pennsylvania survey shows. Professor 
Henry D. Rogers of the University of Pennsylvania ran the Pennsylvania 
survey with as many as seven paid assistants from 1836 to the early 1850's 
and eventually consumed $82,000 in public funds. The Pennsylvania 
geologists made important theoretical contributions and were on the 
verge of significant commercial discoveries with regard to coal when 
the impatient legislators cut the funds. Rogers' attempts at negotiation 
and compromise were futile. In every instance—Douglass Houghton in 
Michigan, William B. Rogers in Virginia, Charles T. Jackson in Maine 
and New Hampshire, Dr. J. C. Booth in Delaware, J. C. Ducatel in 
Maryland, Henry D. Rogers in New Jersey, and W. W. Mather in 
Kentucky—despite wide variations in the institutional size, the budget, 
the quality and quantity of information, the orientation toward basic or 
applied concerns, the geologists had to cultivate the politicians and their 
constituents to keep the surveys alive.23 
As historian A. Hunter Dupree persuasively showed many years ago, 
the actual role of the scientist in the federal government was always 
roughly the same. Scientists executed politicians' mandates except in 
those rare instances in which a scientist could develop his own political 
ties with public decision-makers.24 In the ante-bellum years, the United 
States Coast Survey was perhaps the largest and most successful federal 
scientific operation; its example will suffice to make my point here. The 
contrasting experiences of the Survey's two ante-bellum superintendents 
underline the real social role of the government scientist. Congress 
authorized the Survey in 1807; it began operations in 1815 under the 
56 
 Swiss-born Ferdinand Hassler, a good scientist and administrator who 
nevertheless was less than effective at keeping his political fences in good 
repair.25 In 1818 Congress stopped funding the Survey, largely for 
political reasons. In 1832 Congress re-established the Survey to aid 
commerce—and commercial special interest groups. Again Hassler was 
superintendent. Thanks to some good luck and fortunate initial dis­
coveries, Congress did not question Hassler closely until the early 1840's, 
when the economic downturn and Hassler's lack of political expertise 
sparked a Congressional investigation.26 In 1843 Hassler died; an 
American with many important connections in the worlds of ante-bellum 
science and politics, Alexander Dallas Bache, succeeded Hassler.27 Bache 
was a good scientist and administrator too, but perhaps even more im­
portantly, he had superior political skills; and this combination enabled 
him to transform the Survey into the largest single federal scientific mis­
sion, with an annual budget of half a million dollars by the 1850's.28 
After the late 1830's American scientists' research resources demon­
strably improved; especially important were such new institutional re­
sources as astronomical observatories, natural history museums and 
the Smithsonian Institution. But both ultimate and direct control of 
such research resources resided in the hands of nonscientific laymen, not 
scientists—unless those scientists could exert extraordinary influence 
over their patrons, again suggesting that the social role of the scientist 
in these institutions was much the same as in the colleges and in govern­
ment. Lay patrons donated funds for scientific research institutions, 
mainly for their own purposes, not primarily for those of the scientists. 
Thus between the late 1830's and the Civil War about twenty modern 
observatories were founded with the latest equipment, including the 
famous Merz and Mahler telescopes. These observatories made possible 
by the 1860's the emergence of a small but highly skilled American 
school of astronomers. Yet laymen controlled the purse strings; their 
interests in the heavens were not those of the astronomers. Thus Wil­
liams College's trustees established an observatory because they were 
persuaded students would learn natural theology by studying the stars.29 
The Cincinnati Observatory, opened in 1845, was the brainchild of 
enterprising astronomer Ormsby MacKnight Mitchel: he sold sub­
scriptions to Cincinnati citizens who purchased the right to view the 
heavens. Eventually this conflicted with Mitchel's ambitious research 
plans.30 When institutions such as West Point, Georgetown College, 
Amherst, Dartmouth, Union, Harvard and Dickinson founded observa­
tories, the relations between scientists and lay patrons were not as com­
plex as in Cincinnati;31 but lay patrons, not astronomers, called the tune. 
Thus it was the largess of Boston Brahmins that built the marvellous 
Harvard installation, which opened in 1847 with an expensive fifteen 
inch telescope with 2000 magnification. The impulse to raise the funds 
for the new facility on the Charles was a response to the spectacle of up57

 start Cincinnati having a better observatory than Harvard—or Boston.32 
Scientists had to handle their potential patrons with some care; thus 
the Dudley Observatory, of Albany, New York, floundered essentially 
because its director, Benjamin A. Gould, treated those members of the 
local gentry who supported the Observatory in so tactless, arrogant, and 
jejune a manner that they finally washed their hands of the project.33 
And in the other instances of ante-bellum research institutions, much 
the same was true: the balance of power rested with lay patrons, not 
with the scientists—unless the scientists had unusual personal skills 
which transcended the limitations of their social role. Harvard's mag­
nificent Museum of Comparative Zoology, which opened in 1859 after 
a brilliant fund-raising campaign directed by the enormously influential 
Agassiz, was a monument to the awe with which local citizens regarded 
him as a scientist and his own skills in dealing with the Boston gentry.34 
The Lawrence and Sheffield scientific schools, which opened at Harvard 
and Yale in 1847 and 1861 respectively, became important centers of 
scientific research. But wealthy philanthropists donated funds because 
of the promise these schools held for economic and commercial benefits.35 
And the Smithsonian, which Congress founded in 1846 with James 
Smithson's half million dollar bequest, certainly became in the ante­
bellum years an important nerve center of American scientific institu­
tions. Its international exchange program brought precious foreign 
scientific literature to America; its annual Contributions series carried 
specialized reports of original research; its data-gathering operations— 
as in natural history specimens and meteorological observations—were 
invaluable for the progress of science; and the Smithsonian became, with 
the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the visible 
institutional manifestation of an emerging national scientific community. 
Yet these achievements flowed neither from Smithson's will (which was 
highly ambiguous) nor from the certainties of American politics (several 
groups had different ideas about the proper disposal of the gift) but 
from the determined efforts of such scientists as Coast Survey super­
intendent Bache and the Smithsonian's first secretary, Joseph Henry, 
who fought hard—and well—to make the Smithsonian a distinctively 
scientific institution.36 We must not overestimate institutional resources 
for scientific research in the ante-bellum era. Funds were scarce; the 
Smithson's total annual budget was $30,000; except for the Harvard 
and the Naval Observatories, American observatories did not have the 
necessary funds for all the latest equipment in use in Europe, let alone 
for sufficient staff; colleges were not research institutions. In most in­
stances, scientists paid the costs of their research; a few famous men, 
such as Agassiz, were fortunate enough to stitch together their own 
private networks of patrons for their research.37 In the ante-bellum era, 
scientists had no "broker" institutions, such as the gigantic private 
foundations of the twentieth century or the National Science Founda58

 tion, to raise and redistribute their research funds. Hence laymen, not 
scientists, determined many of the research priorities. 
In the three decades following 1830 American scientific societies, 
academies and associations took on a new, vigorous level of existence 
with new possibilities for survival.38 Yet the social role of the scientist 
in such societies was limited in much the same way it was in other ante­
bellum scientific institutions which I have discussed, for the specialists 
had to share power with nonspecialists for such societies to be viable in 
an organizational sense. With the signal exceptions of the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science and the American Medical 
Association, all ante-bellum scientific societies were local institutions, 
rooted in a particular urban social ecology; they were like fragile orchids, 
dependent upon the right combination of circumstances. Obviously an 
urban milieu, a modicum of economic prosperity, the presence of an 
active, competent research community and enough of a followership of 
nonresearchers to make the society self-sustaining—these were minimum 
requirements. Scientific societies rose and fell according to local circum­
stances; but, as John C. Greene has perceptively insisted, once higher 
mathematics was introduced into physical science, such societies could 
exist only for the nonmathematical natural sciences.39 Dozens of such 
natural history societies appeared after 1830 on both sides of the Alleghenies,
and the relations between the specialists and the cultivators 
or consumers of scientific culture were absolutely critical. Thus New 
York City remained essentially in the prescientific "societies of the arts" 
phase, because the city's scientific community was small, so small that 
it was overshadowed by Albany's impressive scientific cadre.40 The Al­
bany Institute, founded in 1824, became a roaring success for about two 
decades because distinguished researchers and local gentry could work 
together; as their goals became different, the Institute floundered.41 In 
Boston, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the Boston 
Society of Natural History, founded in 1780 and 1830 respectively, came 
alive when both specialized researchers and local gentlemen of culture 
worked together.42 In the West after the mid-1830's more than a dozen 
scientific academies and societies emerged—in Cincinnati in 1835, St. 
Louis in 1836 and again in 1856, Little Rock in 1837, Cleveland in 
1845, Milwaukee in 1848 and in 1857, Louisville in 1851 and again 
in 1857, Flint in 1853, Grand Rapids in 1854 and Chicago in 1856.43 
Especially in these western cities, such natural history societies needed 
both competent researchers who could keep abreast of new developments 
and methods, and, at the same time, loyal followers, for there were 
never enough specialists in the western cities to make a society institu­
tionally viable.44 
And on a national scale the same dilemma of too few producers and 
too many consumers of scientific culture bedevilled the American Asso­
ciation for the Advancement of Science. The AAAS was founded in 
59 
 1848 by a pre-existing group of specialists in the American Association 
of Geologists and Naturalists. The small elite of specialists which ran it 
in ante-bellum years had grandiose plans to use the Association to create 
a national culture of American science and a national constituency of 
American scientists.45 Its leaders sought to invent a national culture of 
American science by pre-empting many issues of scientific public policy 
from nonscientists. They formed lobbying committees on an American 
prime meridian, uniform weights and measures, promotion of fish cul­
ture, a federal system of meteorological observers, ethnological surveys, a 
North Polar Sea expedition—and gave Bache's Coast Survey a ringing 
endorsement.46 The Association's elite corps of specialists tried to create 
a national constituency of scientists by collaborating with the Smith­
sonian, by preparing natural history handbooks for nonspecialists and 
by instructing Spencer F. Baird, the Association's secretary, to prepare 
an accurate roster of all potential and actual members, complete with 
names, addresses, occupations, scientific interests and scientific collec­
tions and equipment. The roster (see "Thoreau box"), which still 
exists, obviously suggests that the Association's leaders had in mind a 
systematic inventory of American scientific talent for the use of such 
"national" scientific institutions as the Association, the Smithsonian, 
and perhaps the Coast Survey.47 
Yet on balance the Association's grand plans were limited by the 
context of the age—in particular by the possibilities of the social role 
of the scientist in ante-bellum America. The Association's specialistresearchers
had some power; they could torpedo the National Institute 
for the Promotion of Science when they came to suspect its scientific 
character, and they could influence the direction the Smithsonian would 
take.48 But the Association's ambitious plans to invent a national 
culture of American science and thus affect scientific public policy came 
to naught. So did the effort to create a national scientific constituency, 
even though the Association held its annual meetings in different cities 
to stimulate that constituency. The Association's membership had a 
high turnover; of the more than 2100 individuals who joined the Asso­
ciation before 1861 only 23 percent were still members by then.49 It 
was only after the Civil War (which the Association barely survived) 
that membership stopped fluctuating and began to grow steadily.50 
While the small coterie of specialists who dominated the Association 
probably made the membership problem worse by often using the 
Association for their own private ends, the real cause of the member­
ship problem was the wide intellectual, professional and experiential 
gap between specialist-researchers in science and consumers of scientific 
culture.51 The Association's elite had not yet created an impersonal 
scientific community for the simple reason that it was probably im­
possible. In a larger sense the Association's difficulties and promises 
reflected those of ante-bellum scientific institutions generally. Ante60

 bellum scientific institutions helped shape and define a generalized 
social role for the scientist, but they did not and could not create two 
indispensable preconditions for scientific professionalization and pro­
fessionalism—a culture of scientific professionalism, a body of imper­
sonal, cosmopolitan values and symbols of authority permeating the 
functions of institutions and the roles of men; and, even more im­
portantly, direct institutional autonomy, or scientific self-determination. 
In a sense scientific professionalization and professionalism are political 
phenomena in the history of culture and of science, for they mean the 
extent of self-determination which a cultural elite successfully claims for 
itself in the larger society. The social role of the ante-bellum scientist 
facilitated the expression of professionalism by some scientists, but it 
could not underwrite the social and institutional processes of profes­
sionalization. That had to await the dawning of a new epoch in Amer­
ican cultural history. 
By the early 1900's a new network of American scientific and educa­
tional institutions had taken shape as an interrelated system in response 
to the drastic inner changes in the structures and processes of science 
so manifest at the nineteenth century's close. At the center of the new 
network were the graduate universities, which began to exert an influence 
on national cultural trends by the 1890's. For our purposes what the 
new universities did was create new possibilities and a new social role 
for the American scientist not feasible in the ante-bellum era, save under 
extraordinary and perhaps singular circumstances. That social role 
was the academically trained researcher who professionally identified 
with a particular science. Such an individual could and did keep abreast 
of the latest work in his field. The possibilities inherent in his social 
role meant that, given a decent chance, he could contribute to knowledge 
and perhaps become distinguished. What the universities in particular 
did was to introduce impersonal and universalistic standards of training, 
competence and performance for all sciences, and, as importantly, insti­
tutional mechanism for achieving these standards for whole generations 
of aspiring and practicing scientists—through graduate programs, full 
time scientific careers, research facilities, and, above all, high social and 
institutional approval for original research, or at least, for the academic 
motto of publish and profit. Now American scientific institutions could 
produce entire generations of specialist-researchers across the whole 
spread of scientific disciplines, from the hard physical sciences to the 
softer social and behavioral disciplines. The emergence of generations 
of researchers did not depend upon the accidents of personality and 
biography, at least not primarily. Parenthetically this shift can be 
followed in the American Association's post-Appomattox history. Mem­
bership doubled from 953 in 1877 to 1,922 in 1882, and remained on 
61 
 that plateau until the early 1900's, when it doubled again, to about 
4,000, and it increased to about 8,000 in 1910. In 1882, in response to 
the inner changes in science, a new generation of Association leaders 
abolished the old generalized physical and natural science meeting sec­
tions for nine "lettered" sections representing distinct disciplines, so that 
specialists in each could meet together for professional intercourse. Im­
plicit in the 1882 reorganization was the shared recognition that it was 
necessary to distinguish both among the many legitimate sciences and 
between specialists and nonspecialists. By the early 1900's the rising 
academic scientists in the Association moved the date of the annual 
meeting from late August, a time presumably convenient for persons 
in many different occupations, to Christmas-week, a time specifically 
convenient for academics.52 
By the early 1900's enough of the private graduate universities, such 
as Johns Hopkins, Cornell, Chicago, Clark and Stanford, together with 
older institutions, such as Harvard, Yale and Columbia, were setting a 
newer and higher standard in scientific and scholarly life. This en­
couraged a growing number of state universities, such as California, 
Wisconsin and Michigan, to imitate them and become centers of ad­
vanced, specialized research and instruction. Less favored public insti­
tutions, including land-grant, polytechnic and agricultural schools, fol­
lowed suit to the limits of their resources and abilities, often providing 
undergraduate training for the new generations of scientists and then 
providing post-doctoral professional employment. This institutional 
revolution in American higher education provided many more possibil­
ities for scientific specialization and professionalization than had the 
rather limited ante-bellum revolution in the fifteen Northeastern liberal 
arts colleges. Of course the new universities benefited from far more 
prosperous times than did the ante-bellum colleges. By the close of the 
Gilded Age, college degrees were worth something vocationally. Even 
more importantly, the universities could create the social role of the 
autonomous research-specialist, with academic freedom, tenure, facilities, 
intellectual stimuli and the like, because the inner revolution of science 
made evident to educated laymen the wisdom of scientific self-determi­
nation, because ambitious university presidents wanted the best faculty 
and competed with one another for them, and because in many instances 
the university professorate created its own external client populations 
and pressure groups which would concede much freedom to the pro­
fessors.53 
Consider the blossoming of chemistry in America. More than any 
other science, chemistry had major support from business and industry 
in its institutional development. Yet the social role which the new 
scientific institutions, especially the new universities, created mattered a 
great deal. It influenced both the direction and the velocity of chem­
istry's institutional growth. Sophisticated chemistry instruction began 
at Harvard in 1848, but had a heavily applied bias in the Lawrence 
62 
 school—as Harvard called its technical department—until 1863 when 
German-trained Oliver Wolcott Gibbs, newly appointed, introduced 
graduate courses in basic chemistry. In the 1870's and 1880's the Harvard 
College and Lawrence chemistry courses were combined and new chem­
istry faculty were appointed to do original research. In 1875 Charles 
Loring Brace synthesized the first organic compound at Harvard; within 
twenty-five years Harvard chemists had synthesized over 4,000 organic 
compounds and had done much basic research in hygenic, inorganic and 
physiological chemistry. Theodore W. Richards' brilliant work in 
atomic chemistry won him a Nobel prize and a growing number of 
German students.54 In broad outline Yale's pattern of institutional 
development in chemistry was similar to Harvard's, as was Johns Hop­
kins', where the able chemist Ira Remsen developed a first class chemistry 
graduate program on the classic German model, immersing graduate 
students in the latest literature and the most exacting methods, and, 
above all, making original investigation the central experience for all 
Hopkins faculty and students. Most of the Hopkins chemical research 
was basic, not applied—although someone discovered saccharin by acci­
dent.55 By the late 1870's at least sixty colleges offered a minimum of 
three undergraduate years of chemistry, usually with the laboratory, 
and some, like Iowa State College, launched chemistry with the lab­
oratory.56 Not surprisingly the number of professional chemists mush­
roomed from about 450 in 1850 to almost 10,000 in 1900. The influence 
of the universities upon the chemistry profession is suggested by the 
fact that in the early 1920's about two-thirds of all chemists held the 
doctoral degree and about forty percent held academic appointments.57 
Obviously chemistry benefited from industrial patronage, but the new 
universities provided advanced training, supplied professional creden­
tials, gave chemical research a strong basic focus and created full time 
scientific careers for a large minority of professional chemists. 
In many respects physics lagged behind chemistry institutionally and 
intellectually until the 1890's. Most American physicists taught experi­
mental and mechanical physics—not the most exciting fields of physics. 
The number of physicists as late as the 1880's was perhaps 150, and 
there were few high-grade physics laboratories or graduate programs.58 
In the 1890's enormous changes took place in the science of physics in 
Europe—the discovery of X-rays, radioactivity, and relativity. American 
physicists responded to these exciting new intellectual challenges in many 
ways. The better graduate universities upgraded the importance of 
physics research, even though it had little apparent economic or in­
dustrial application. It was only after physics instruction and research 
were in the process of being improved that the industrial and economic 
applications of physics became obvious, especially to the electrical in­
dustry, which, in the years 1900 to 1920, became a major source of energy 
for urban centers for lighting and trolley-cars, and in industry, especially 
63 
 in the production of aluminum. Such electrical firms as Westinghouse 
now began to employ electrical engineers who really understood physics. 
This meant that engineering schools now demanded that their students 
take physics courses, which gave the academic physics profession a grow­
ing student clientele. In turn the growth of physics as an undergraduate 
"service" offering permitted the expansion of graduate and basic re­
search programs in physics in the better graduate universities. By the 
early 1920's perhaps eighty percent of American physicists held academic 
appointments and seventy percent held the doctorate. By the late 1920's 
the American physics profession had grown sufficiently in certain major 
universities, and enough American physicists had learned the new theo­
retical physics in Europe, that American physicists could participate in 
the new quantum mechanics and atomic physics.59 Doubtless physics 
developed in part because of its potential for applied work; but even 
more important were the interactions of the new universities, the chang­
ing American physics community and the radically transformed science 
of physics, which together made the United States an important center 
of international physics work by the 1930's. 
The biological sciences also underwent a rapid institutional develop­
ment, thanks in no small measure to the new scientific institutions, 
especially the graduate university. Biology's potential for economic 
application helped its institutional development in the Gilded Age. 
Farmers and other pressure groups, for example, encouraged the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture to develop certain lines of research—eco­
nomic entomology, for example—which later benefited both basic 
research and the development of scientific institutions.60 And they per­
suaded agricultural colleges to launch programs in agricultural chemistry 
and agricultural hybridization, programs which perhaps ironically as­
sisted the development of basic chemistry and genetics programs later 
on.61 Generally speaking, however, it was the prestigious graduate uni­
versities which imported the new experimental biology from Europe 
and thus provided, through the development of advanced programs of 
research and instruction, the institutional basis for American scientific 
eminence in biology after 1900. Columbia University, for example, pro­
moted a brilliant department of zoology after the early 1890's, not from 
any particular dream for a higher gross national product, but because 
presidents Seth Low and Nicholas Murray Butler were ambitious to 
have the best department in America if not the world. On Morningside 
Heights Thomas H. Morgan began the genetics work which won him 
a Nobel prize; Edmund Beecher Wilson did outstanding work on the 
cell; and Henry Fairfield Osborn was a most prolific paleontologist.62 
Other universities—Harvard, Clark, Chicago, Johns Hopkins and Wis­
consin, for example—followed a similar pattern of development, as did 
a host of land-grant institutions a little later, partly because of their 
political commitment to agricultural hybridization.63 Thus was devel­
oped the institutional foundation of modern experimental biology 
64 
 in America. Modern biology, and certainly genetics, had some applied 
economic potential which assisted their institutional development, but 
far more important were the opportunities the graduate universities 
offered to the new academic scientist. By the early 1920's almost sixty 
percent of all botanists and seventy-five percent of all zoologists held 
academic appointments. And most of the rest were government scientists, 
which suggests that the relations between professional biology and the 
larger economy were quite indirect, not direct. As in the instance of 
physics, it was basically student demands for service courses (in the case 
of biology, for such fields as forestry, agriculture and pre-health studies) 
which provided the institutional endowment for the elaboration of 
graduate programs in basic biology.64 
Modern experimental psychology essentially grew up with the new 
universities and then acquired something of an applied base. In Amer­
ica psychology emerged as a scientific alternative to the old-time moral 
philosophy; it experienced its most rapid institutional and intellectual 
development in the new universities (not the old-time colleges) after 
1890. At Harvard, William James created a psychology program within 
the philosophy department. In the 1890's he hired the German psychol­
ogist Hugo Muensterberg to direct the laboratory, train the graduate 
students, and teach the undergraduate psychology course.65 At Harvard 
and elsewhere, psychology became a popular course with students; 
Muensterberg's basic Harvard College course soon enrolled over 360 
students. He worried, ". . . what will the country do with all of these 
psychologists?"66 Most undergraduates took psychology as preparation 
for such growing careers as social work and teaching. On the graduate 
level psychology grew enormously—largely in response to the demand 
for undergraduate psychology teachers with the Ph.D. Between 1884 
and 1918 about two score American universities granted 427 doctorates 
in psychology; as early as 1900 or so, there were strong graduate pro­
grams on native soil—at Harvard, Clark, Cornell, Columbia, Chicago 
and elsewhere. These early experimental psychologists were acutely 
aware they had to make upstart psychology a respectable science in the 
university; as one such pioneer put it, when he ". . . came into the field, 
the important thing for experimental psychology was to make it an 
academic subject, to assure its collegiate and university status. Labora­
tories had to be organized, and textbooks had to be written."67 Psycholo­
gists founded over eighty laboratories and more than a dozen journals— 
the latter first as private nonprofit ventures, later as owned by associa­
tions and societies impersonally.68 Even though many academic pioneers 
of psychology sang the promises of applied psychology, as late as World 
War I barely ten percent of all professional psychologists held nonacademic
appointments.69 This essentially academic institutional devel­
opment of psychology was the institutional platform from which Amer­
ican psychologists elaborated modern learning theory in the 1920's.70 
It was only in the 1920's and later that psychologists began to enter 
65 
 non-academic positions or to consult much with private business clients.71 
By then a self-sustaining profession and science of psychology had long 
existed. Thus was the importance of the new social role created by the 
graduate universities. 
And the new universities made possible other redefinitions of the 
social role of the American scientist simply not possible in ante-bellum 
years. The universities could create enough specialist-researchers, for 
example, to make genuinely specialized scientific societies a social possibil­
ity—or, perhaps, an inevitability. These new scientific societies were na­
tional in outlook; they drew sharp distinctions between the professional 
and the amateur, and excluded the latter by various means. Together 
university and scientific society helped create professional scientific sub­
cultures and a role for the scientist-specialist. Consider the American 
Chemical Society, initially founded in 1876, and reconstituted in 1891 
by a new generation of professional chemists.72 The revitalized society 
rapidly enrolled most of the nation's working chemists. It organized 
thirteen local sections, which met monthly, thus permitting many chem­
ists to participate in the discipline, the Society and the profession regu­
larly. The Society imposed new cosmopolitan standards of professional 
participation, new definitions of the social role of the professional chem­
ist not possible in ante-bellum years. Membership was by nomination 
and election only. The Society's Council conferred full membership on 
those with formal training when there was evidence that they were 
productive and respected chemists. Increasingly specialized training, in­
cluding the doctorate, and research productivity became criteria for 
membership. The Society also took over the Journal of the American 
Chemical Society, upgrading its standards by publishing annual bibli­
ographies and summaries of chemical research with global comprehen­
siveness, and even publishing an annually revised atomic weight table.73 
Such societies emerged in the other sciences, too. In 1899 a wellestablished
group of astronomers founded the Astronomical and Astro-
physical Society of America when they became convinced there were 
enough specialist-researchers to make such an organization viable. As in 
other instances, a pre-existing elite determined membership criteria. 
AASA members could nominate candidates for membership, but only 
the powerful Council could elect them. The AASA's founders announced 
that the society's purpose was ". . . the advancement of astronomy, astro­
physics, and related branches of physics." Mere interest was insufficient; 
only a ". . . person deemed capable of preparing an acceptable paper on 
some subject of astronomy, astrophysics, or related branch of physics . . . " 
was eligible. The American Physical Society, also launched in 1899, was 
organizationally quite similar to the AASA, and functioned according to 
the same kinds of rules, criteria and definition of the role of the scien­
tist.74 In the biological sciences, the American Society of Naturalists was 
founded in 1883 just for "professionals." "Professional" meant, in the 
1880's and 1890's, a full-time science-related career; after 1900, it came 
66 
 to mean higher standards, usually the earned doctorate and some evi­
dence of research activity.75 The Society for Experimental Biology and 
Medicine recruited by invitation only and expelled all members who did 
not present an original paper at least once every two years.76 The psy­
chologists created the American Psychological Association in 1892. In­
creasingly the Association upgraded its standards to include only the 
academically trained researcher in much the same fashion as other 
scientific societies.77 Quite obviously, a new social role for the American 
scientist had been created by the new possibilities of American culture. 
Finally, the new social role of the scientist as researcher-specialist re­
ceived institutional recognition and sanctification in both the govern­
ment and in the new research institutes funded by the gigantic philan­
thropic foundations of the twentieth century. By the 1920's, the federal 
scientific bureaus were usually run by specialists who now possessed the 
power to determine how their appropriations would be spent, to identify 
new research areas as they emerged, and to determine their own inner 
institutional affairs. In other words, in the federal scientific establish­
ment as in the universities and the new societies, there was not only open 
recognition of the professional autonomy of the specialized expert, but 
a buffer of scientific administrators between the lay decision-makers and 
the scientific researchers. For all practical purposes the scientific admin­
istrators, who functioned in a sense as brokers for the researchers, and 
the researchers ran things together.78 And thus the new social role of the 
scientist was reinforced again. Similarly, private foundations began ced­
ing a large measure of autonomy to scientific researchers after 1900 or so; 
often a new class of professional foundation managers came to the fore 
(many of them products of the new university culture). They made the 
actual decisions about which projects received funding.79 The most spec­
tacular example was the Carnegie Institution of Washington, created in 
1902 by Andrew Carnegie with an endowment of ten million dollars—all 
for scientific and scholarly research. Carnegie gave the trustees enormous 
discretion: they could define critical areas for support, select particular 
projects to fund, and, in the largest sense, determine research priorities 
and policies. Before the World War, the Institution had established ten 
major departments of research, each of which carried on its own autono­
mous research programs—the Department of Terrestrial Magnetism cor­
rected many navigational maps, the Solar Observatory on Mount Wilson, 
in California, made many contributions to astrophysics, and the Depart­
ment for Experimental Evolution became a major research laboratory in 
the new science of genetics, providing much support to both resident and 
temporary investigators over the years.80 With the appearance of the 
large-scale foundation and the scientific research institute, the American 
scientific professoriate now had benefited from a long-term institutional 
revolution which made possible America's rise to world eminence in 
science. 
Iowa State University 
67 
 footnotes 
1. Joseph Ben-David, The Scientist's Role in Society: A Comparative Study (Englewood 
Cliffs, 1971), 13-20, 193. 
2. Richard H. Shryock, "American Indifference to Basic Science during the Nineteenth 
Century," Archives Internationales d'Histoire des Sciences, 28 (1948-1949), 3-18. 
3. Nathan Reingold, "American Indifference to Basic Research: A Reappraisal," in 
George H. Daniels, éd., Nineteenth Century American Science: A Reappraisal (Evanston, 
1972), 38-62; George H. Daniels, American Science in the Age of Jackson (New York, 1968), 
passim. 
4. In addition to several essays in Daniels, éd., Nineteenth Century American Science: A 
Reappraisal, see also Sally G. Kohlstedt, The Formation of the American Scientific Com­
munity: The American Association for tJie Advancement of Science, 1848-1860 (Urbana, 
1976); Daniels, American Science in the Age of Jackson; Daniels, "The Process of Professionalization
in American Science: The Emergent Period, 1820-1860," Isis 58 (1967), 151-166. 
5. See the remarkable E. S. Dana, A Century of Science in America (New Haven, 1918), 
especially thorough on 19th century American scientific work. 
6. Ben-David, The Scientist's Role in Society, 139-168, has a different perspective on the 
ante-bellum era. 
7. Kohlstedt, The Formation of the American Scientific Community, 190-223, discusses the 
problem of membership retention for the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science—and shows that a fellowship was as indispensable as a leadership. 
8. Brooke Hindle, The Pursuit of Science in Revolutionary America 1735-1789 (Chapel 
Hill, 1956); Raymond P. Stearns, Science in the British Colonies of America (Urbana, 1970). 
9. Stanley M. Guralnick, Science and the Ante-Bellum American College, Memoirs of the 
American Philosophical Society 109 (Philadelphia, 1975), 94-104; see also Dana, A Century 
of Science in America, 60-192. 
10. George P. Merrill, The First One Hundred Years of American Geology (New Haven, 
1924), 1-126; Dana, A Century of Science in America, 60-192; Cecil J. Schneer, "Ebenezer 
Emmons and the Foundations of American Geology," Isis 40 (1969), 439-450. 
11. Guralnick, Science and the Ante-Bellum American College, 107-109. George P. Merrill, 
"Contributions to the History of American Geology," Annual Report of the Smithsonian 
Institution (1904) (Washington, 1906); Merrill, Contributions to a History of American State 
Geological and Natural History Surveys: Bulletin of the United States National Museum, 
109 (Washington, 1920); Merrill, The First Hundred Years of American Geology (New Haven, 
1924), are detailed accounts of geology in America. 
12. Guralnick, Science and the Ante-Bellum College, 47-77. 
13. Ibid., 109-114. 
14. William M. and Mabel Smallwood, Natural History and the American Mind (New 
York, 1941), 285-351; Dana, A Century of Science in America, 391-401, 439-454. 
15. William Coleman, Biology in the Nineteenth Century: Problems of Forum, Function, 
and Transformation (New York, 1971), 16-56. 
16. Guralnick, Science and the Ante-Bellum American College, 109-114; Hofstadter and 
Metzger, The Development of Academic Freedom in the United States, 209-234. 
17. Guralnick, Science and the Ante-Bellum College, 192; Charles Weiner, "Science and 
Higher Education," in David Van Tassel and Michael G. Hall, eds., Science and Society in 
the United States (Homewood, Illinois, 1966), 170-175; William H. Dall, Spencer Fullerton 
Baird. A Biography (Philadelphia and London, 1915), 1-220 and Dean Conrad Allard, Jr., 
"Spencer Fullerton Baird and the U.S. Fish Commission: A Study in the History of 
American Science" (Unpublished doctoral dissertation, George Washington University, 1967), 
1-24. 
18. Nathaniel Southgate Shaler, The Autobiography of Nathaniel Southgate Shaler (Boston 
and New York, 1909), 95-100. 
19. As cited in Dall, Spencer Fullerton Baird, 156. 
20. Merrill, The First One Hundred Years of American Geology, 127-390; Merrill, Con­
tributions to a History of American State Geological and Natural History Surveys; Walter B. 
Hendrickson, "Nineteenth Century State Geological Surveys: Early Government Support of 
Science," Isis LI I (1961), 357-370. 
21. Merrill, Contributions to a History of American State Geological and Natural History 
Surveys, 327-362; John M. Clarke, James Hall of Albany, Geologist and Paleontologist (Albany, 
1921), and Nathan Reingold, éd., Science in Nineteenth Century America: A Documentary 
History (New York, 1964), 162-174. 
22. Merrill, Contributions to a History of American State Geological and Natural History 
Surveys, 149-158; Stanley M. Guralnick, "Theology and Religion Before Darwin: The Case 
of Edward Hitchcock, Theologian and Geologist (1793-1864)," Isis 43 (1972), 529-543. 
23. Merrill, Contributions to a History of American State Geological and Natural History 
Surveys, 428-455, 158-238, 507-511, 129-136, 299-306, 51-52, 137-148, 307-326, 102-103. 
68 
 24. A. Hunter Dupree, Science in the Federal Government: A History of Policies and 
Activities to 1940 (Cambridge, 1957), 20-119. 
25. Florian Cajori, The Career of Ferdinand Rudolph Hassler, First Superintendant of 
the United States Coast Survey: A Chapter in the History of Science in America (Boston, 
1929). 
26. Dupree, Science in the Federal Government, 29-33, 51-56. 
27. Merle M. Odgers, Alexander Dallas Bache, Scientist and Educator (Philadelphia, 
1947); B. A. Gould, "Eulogy on Prof. Alexander Dallas Bache," Proceedings of the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science (1869), 1-47. 
28. Dupree, Science in the Federal Government, 100-105. 
29. Howard S. Miller, Dollars for Research: Science and Its Patrons in Nineteenth Cen­
tury America (Seattle, 1970), 26-27. 
30. Ibid., 29-33. 
31. Guralnick, Science and the Ante-Bellum College, 83-93. 
32. Miller, Dollars for Research, 34-39. 
33. Ibid., 39-47; The Alexander Dallas Bache Papers, Manuscripts Division, Library of 
Congress, Washington, D.C., contain interesting materials on the Dudley Observatory affair. 
34. Edward Lurie, Louis Agassiz: A Life in Science (abr. éd.: Chicago, 1960), 212-251. 
35. Miller, Dollars for Research, 71-97. See also Russell H . Chittenden, History of the 
Sheffield Scientific School of Yale University 1846-1922 (2 vols.; New Haven, 1928) and Samuel 
Eliot Morison, Three Centuries of Harvard (Cambridge, 1937). 
36. Dupree, Science in the Federal Government, 66-90; Miller, Dollars for Research, 3-23; 
W. J. Rhees, comp. and éd., The Smithsonian Institution Documents Relative to Its Origin 
and History 1835-1899 (Smithsonian Institution, Miscellaneous Collections, 4-43, Washington, 
1901), I, 5-439; George Brown Goode, éd., The Smithsonian Institution 1845-1896, The History 
of Its First Half Century (Washington, 1897), 1-58; Geoffrey T . Hellman, The Smithsonian: 
Octopus on the Mall (Philadelphia, 1966), 26-55. 
37. Guralnick, Science and the Ante-Bellum American College, 47-118, discusses conditions 
of research in the colleges. Charles Weiner, "Joseph Henry's Lectures in Natural Philosophy: 
Teaching and Research in Physics, 1832-1847" (Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Case 
Institute of Technology, 1965), 28-47, says that at the Albany Academy Joseph Henry had 
35 teaching/contact hours a week and taught all but five weeks of the calendar year. On 
personal relationships in the philanthropy of science, see Miller, Dollars for Research, 48-70. 
38. Ralph S. Bates, Scientific Societies in the United States, Second edition (New York, 
1958), 28-84. 
39. John C. Greene, "Science, Learning, and Utility: Patterns of Organization in the 
Early American Republic," in Alexandra Oleson and Sanborn C. Brown, eds., The Pursuit 
of Knowledge in the Early American Republic: American Scientific and Learned Societies 
from Colonial Times to the Civil War (Baltimore and London, 1976), 19. 
40. Brooke Hindle, "The Underside of the Learned Society in New York, 1754-1854," in 
Oleson and Brown, eds., The Pursuit of Knowledge in the Early American Republic, 84-113. 
41. James M. Hobbins, "Shaping a Provincial Learned Society: The Early History of the 
Albany Institute," in Oleson and Brown, eds., The Pursuit of Knowledge in the Early 
American Republic, 117-143. 
42. Greene, "Science, Learning, and Utility," 9-16. 
43. Walter B. Hendrickson, "Science and Culture in the American Middle West," Isis 64 
(1973), 326-340. 
44. Henry D. Shapiro, "The Western Academy of Natural Sciences and the Structure of 
Science in the Ohio Valley, 1810-1850," in Oleson and Brown, eds., The Pursuit of Knowledge 
in the Early American Republic, 219-242. 
45. I am deeply indebted to Professor Henry D. Shapiro of the University of Cincinnati for 
these and other insights. 
46. Based on my research in AAAS Proceedings, 1848-1866. 
47 ., Addresses of Scientific Men, bound volume of circulars, circa 1853, Spencer 
F. Baird Papers, Smithsonian Institution Archives, Washington, D.C. 
48. Sally G. Kohlstedt, "A Step Toward Scientific Self-Identity in the United States: T h e 
Failure of the National Institute," Isis 62 (1971), 339-362. 
49. Kohlstedt, "Savants and Professionals: The American Association for the Advance­
ment of Science," in Oleson and Brown, eds., The Pursuit of Knowledge in the Early 
Republic, 303. 
50. Ibid., 304. 
51. Daniel deB. Beaver, "The American Scientific Community, 1800-1860: A StatisticalHistorical
Study" (Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Yale University, 1966), 156-185, 359, 
361, shows the most active authors of scientific papers lived in but several Northeastern 
cities, followed full time scientific careers, and had a college degree—thus most unlike 
many "amateurs." 
52. See the table in AAAS Proceedings, 62 (1910), 21. The L. O. Howard Files, James 
69 
 McKeen Cattell Papers, Manuscripts Division, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C., illus­
trate academic scientists' influence on the Association. 
53. Laurence Veysey, The Rise of the American University (Chicago, 1965). 
54. Edward H. Beardsley, The Rise of the American Chemistry Profession 1850-1900 
(Gainesville, 1964), 7-11; S. E. Morison, éd., The Development of Harvard University Since the 
Inauguration of President Eliot 1869-1929 (Cambridge, 1930), 258-276. 
55. Beardsley, The Rise of the American Chemistry Profession 1850-1900, 1-7, 11-13, 19-22; 
Chittenden, History of the Sheffield Scientific School, I, 65-72, 236; Hugh Hawkins, Pioneer: 
A History of the Johns Hopkins University 1874-1889 (Ithaca, 1960), 47-48, 140-142, 223-224. 
56. Earle D. Ross, The History of Iowa State College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts 
(Ames, 1942), 140, 158-159. 
57. Beardsley, The Rise of the American Chemistry Profession 1850-1900, 12-13, 22; 
Margret W. Rossiter, "Women Scientists in America Before 1920," American Scientist 62 
(1974), 313. 
58. Daniel J. Kevles, "The Study of Physics, 1865-1916" (Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
Princeton University, 1964), 1-76, 112-164. 
59. Ibid., 165-287; see also Stanley Coben, "The Scientific Establishment and the Trans­
mission of Quantum Mechanics to the United States, 1919-1932," American Historical Review 
76 (1971), 442-446, Rossiter, "Women Scientists in America Before 1920," 313. 
60. Dupree, Science in the Federal Government, 149-183. 
61. L. E. Noland, "History of the Department of Zoology, University of Wisconsin," Bios 
21 (1950), 83-109; Morison, éd., The Development of Harvard University, 508-517; Edward 
H . Beardsley, Harry L. Russell and Agricultural Science in Wisconsin (Madison, 1969); 
Charles Rosenberg, "Science, Technology and Economic Growth: The Case of the Agri­
cultural Experiment Station Scientist, 1875-1914," in Daniels, éd., Nineteenth Century Amer­
ican Science: A Reappraisal, 181-209. 
62. Henry E. Crampton, The Department of Zoology at Columbia University (New York, 
1942), 3-24. 
63. Based on my research in two dozen manuscript collections; list available upon re­
quest. See also Hamilton Cravens, "The Role of Universities in the Rise of Experimental 
Biology," The Science Teacher, 44 (Jan. 1977), 33-37. 
64. Rossiter, "Women Scientists in America Before 1920," 313. 
65. William James to Hugo Muensterberg, February 21, March 23, April 13, April 19, 
1892, William James Papers, Houghton Library, Harvard University, Cambridge. 
66. Hugo Muensterberg to James McKeen Cattell, February 25, 1899, Cattell Papers. See 
also: Robert M. Yerkes, "The Scientific Way," typescript autobiography, 83-109, Robert M. 
Yerkes Papers, Yale University Medical Library; Hugo Muensterberg, "Report of the Psycho­
logical Laboratory 1909," "Report to the President—1904," Hugo Muensterberg Papers, Boston 
Public Library, Boston. 
67. Edward Bradford Titchener to Robert M. Yerkes, August 14, 1914, Yerkes Papers. 
68. T h e James Mark Baldwin Files, 1892-1903, Cattell Papers, illustrate how personal 
ownership of journals worked. 
69. James McKeen Cattell, "Psychology in America," Science 70 (1929), 339-340. 
70. Hamilton Cravens and John C. Burnham, "Psychology and Evolutionary Naturalism 
in American Thought, 1890-1940," American Quarterly, 23 (1971), 635-657. 
71. Loren Baritz, Servants of Power (Middletown, Connecticut, 1960) covers the rise of 
industrial and applied psychology. 
72. Beardsley, The Rise of the American Chemistry Profession 1850-1900, 23-30; Charles 
A. Browne and Mary E. Weeks, A History of the American Chemical Society. Seventy-Five 
Years (Washington, D.C., 1952), 14-40. 
73. Beardsley, The Rise of the American Chemistry Profession 1850-1900, 30-42; Browne 
and Weeks, A History of the American Chemical Society, 41-67. 
74. E. B. Frost, "The Astronomical and Astrophysical Society of America," Science (New 
Series) 10 (1899), 785-795, quotes on 786, 787; A. G. Webster, "Societies and Academies," Science 
(New Series) 9 (1899), 784-785; Kevles, "The Study of Physics, 1865-1916," 233-243, 269-287. 
75. C. S. Minot, et al., "The Relation of the Society of American Naturalists to other 
Societies," Science (N.S.) 15 (1902), 242. Comments about changes in membership require­
ments based on my analyses of membership lists in American Society of Naturalists, Records 
of the Society of Naturalists, E U. S. / t i t l e varies/ vols. 1-30 (1884-1911). 
76 , "Report of the Society of Experimental Biology and Medicine," Science (N.S.), 
19 (1904), 829. See also William Gies folder, Conklin Papers. 
77. Samuel W. Fernberger, "The American Psychological Association: A Historical Sum­
mary, 1892-1930," Psychological Bulletin 29 (1932), 1-89; The John B. Watson folders, Yerkes 
Papers, illuminate many aspects of the psychology profession. 
78. Dupree, Science in the Federal Government, 149-183, 232-301. 
79. Merle E. Curti and Roderick Nash, Private Philanthrophy in the Shaping of American 
Higher Education (New Brunswick, 1965), 212-214. 
80. For annual reports of each department, see Carnegie Institution of Washington, 
Year Book No. 1 (Washington, D.C., 1902), et seq. 
70 
