Book Reviews 117
Book
Reviews
Imagine the Sound: Experimental African American Literature After Civil Rights.
 By Carter Mathes. Reviewed by Ajay Heble. 119
This Benevolent Experiement: Indigenous Boarding Schools, Genocide,
and Redress in Canada and the United States. By Andrew Woolford.
Reviewed by Sarah K.P. Hayes. 120
By Any Media Necessary: The New Youth Activism. By Henry Jenkins,
Sangita Shresthova, Liana Gamber-Thompson, Neta Kligler-Vilenchik,
Arely Zimmerman. Reviewed by Carolyn Marcille. 121
Dangerous Grounds: Antiwar Coffeehouses and Military Dissent in the
 Vietnam Era. By David L. Parsons. Reviewed by Justin Rogers-Cooper.  122
Turns of Event: Nineteenth-Century American Literary Studies in Motion.
Edited by Hester Blum. Reviewed by Amanda Stuckey. 124
Just Another Southern Town: Mary Church Terrell and the Struggle for Racial
 Justice in the Nation’s Capitol. By Joan Quigley. Reviewed by
 Stephen Robinson.  125
From Storefront to Monument: Tracing the Public History of the Black Museum
 Movement. By Andrea A. Burns. Reviewed by Zanice Bond. 125
Part of Our Lives: A People’s History of the American Public Library. 
 By Wayne A. Wiegand. Reviewed by Dawson Barrett. 126
Damned Nation: Hell in America from the Revolution to Reconstruction.
 By Kathryn Gin Lum. Reviewed by Joseph Drexler-Dreis. 127
Mavericks, Money, and Men: The AFL, Black Players, and the Evolution
 of Modern Football. By Charles K. Ross. Reviewed by Steve Marston 129
The Construction of Whiteness: An Interdisciplinary Analysis of Race
 Formation and the Meaning of a White Identity. Edited by
	 Stephen	Middleton,	David	R.	Roediger,	and	Donald	M.	Shaffer.
 Reviewed by Gwyneth Mellinger. 130
117
 118 Book Reviews
Editorial note: Book reviews are edited for typographical errors, and 
otherwise are printed as received.
Graffiti and Street Art: Reading, Writing and Representing the City.
 Edited by Konstantinos Avramidis and Myrto Tsilimpounidi.
 Reviewed by John Lennon. 131
The City Since 9/11: Literature, Film, Television. Edited by Keith Wilhite.
 Reviewed by Wayne E. Arnold. 132
Heathen, Hindoo, Hindu: American Representations of India, 1721–1893.
 By Michael J. Altman. Reviewed by Neil Meyer. 133
East Meet Black: Asian and Black Masculinities in the Post-Civil Rights Era.
 By Chong Chon-Smith. Reviewed by Crystal S. Anderson. 134
 Book Reviews 119
Reviews
IMAGINE THE SOUND: Experimental African American Literature After Civil Rights. 
By Carter Mathes. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2015. 
There is a rich and vital history of African American creative practitioners who have 
used	experimental	and	improvisational	music	to	sound	off	against	systems	of	fixity	and	
oppression, to imagine alternatives to dead-end situations, and to enact other possible 
futures. In his engaging, critically astute, and deeply contextualized study Imagine the 
Sound, Carter Mathes draws on this history, on this music (particularly the music of John 
Coltrane and Sun Ra), to analyze the work of writers such as Henry Dumas, Larry Neal, 
Toni Cade Bambara, and James Baldwin to explore how the sonic functions in post-Civil 
Rights African American expressive culture as a force for black political resistance and 
radical thought. What is literary sound? How, that is, can sound be mobilized on the pages 
of literary texts? And how might the experimental edge, transformational energy, and 
critical force of the expansive sound we associate with free jazz and creative improvised 
music translate into literary form?  
Drawing, in particular, on John Coltrane’s far-reaching late career innovations 
with “experimental sound as a productive challenge to the limitations of the American 
mainstream” (23), Mathes’s study asks, “how can we imagine a literary genealogy of 
experimental African American writing that continues to assert itself through elaborations 
of its sonority?” (196). Mathes hears in Coltrane a foundational context for exploring 
and analyzing what he calls “sonic innovations in literary form” (24), innovations that 
constituted “aesthetic and political approaches to refashioning African American literary 
form	during	the	post-Civil	Rights	era”	(24).		In	his	chapter	on	one	of	the	leading	figures	
in the Black Arts Movement, Larry Neal, Mathes discusses how “the shifting quality of 
a justly intoned sound [as opposed to more traditional tempered forms of tonal expression]
begins	to	define	part	of	the	conceptual	break	that	free	jazz	articulates	against	the	
constraints of hierarchically ordered Western musical scales” (104). Reading these sonic 
interventions of free jazz alongside the struggles of black nationalism, Mathes opens up 
resonant areas of inquiry for contextualizing and understanding Neal’s work, focusing 
on “the politics of sound as an expressive force of black revolution” (104). Similarly, in 
the chapter on Toni Cade Bambara, Mathes draws attention to sound as a resistant force 
 120 Book Reviews
in	Bambara’s	fiction,	reflecting	her	“desire	to	create	works	of	art	that	are,	in	her	words,	
‘indigestible to the imperialist system’” (145). 
These links among literary aesthetics, sound, experimentation, and strategies of 
resistance are handled throughout with exemplary care and thoughtfulness. Although 
there are some moments where the analysis seems to me to stray somewhat from the main 
line of inquiry, and while I might at times have liked to see clearer signposting of the 
connections between some of the key strands of the argument, this is an important book 
that clearly broadens the scope and extends the reach of scholarship on African American 
literature	and	black	experimental	music.	Its	readings	of	the	soundings-off	that	occur	in	
the literary works in question are insightful and compelling, and the questions opened up 
by the critical and political terrain it covers remain timely and pressing.  
Ajay Heble School of English and Theatre Studies /
 International Institute for Critical Studies in Improvisation
 University of Guelph, Canada
 
THIS BENEVOLENT EXPERIMENT: Indigenous Boarding Schools, Genocide, and 
Redress in Canada and the United States. By Andrew Woolford. Lincoln, NE: University 
of Nebraska Press. 2015.
Through the lens of genocide studies, This Benevolent Experiment illustrates how 
the Indigenous boarding school systems in Canada and the United States contributed to 
North America’s cultural genocide of Indigenous peoples. Woolford sets the groundwork 
for	his	book	by	defending	the	term	cultural	genocide;	he	argues	that	the	qualifier	“cultural”	
does not minimize the genocidal objective of the boarding schools, nor does it ignore 
the many Indigenous communities that persevered and survived the boarding schools’ 
attempt	at	cultural	annihilation.	To	do	this,	Woolford	invokes	Rafael	Lemkin’s	definition	
of genocide, adopted by the United Nations in 1948, which includes the extermination 
of a group’s traditions, language, religion and culture for the purpose of eliminating the 
group as a whole. This Benevolent Experiment applies	this	definition	to	the	assimilative	
mission of the North American Indigenous boarding schools to assert that Canada and 
the United States used the boarding schools as a tool for cultural genocide. 
Woolford fashions the term “settler colonial mesh” to help readers understand how 
this cultural genocide operated on the macro-societal level (the larger social and political 
forces	that	conceptualized	the	“Indian	Problem”),	meso-societal	level	(specific	government
and non-government institutions, including the boarding schools, that sought to 
solve the “Indian Problem”) and the micro-societal level (the individual actors, such as 
school	officials,	teachers,	and	staff,	who	interacted	with	students,	parents	and	communities).
Woolford visualizes each of these levels as nets, that when placed together form a 
mesh “that operates to entrap Indigenous peoples within the settler colonial assimilative 
project” (3). However, Woolford reminds us that mesh is porous, and therefore holes in 
the settler colonial project sometimes allowed for Indigenous resistance and survival. 
Woolford applies the metaphor of the settler colonial mesh to two schools in Manitoba
(Portage la Prairie Indian Residential School and Fort Alexander Indian Residential 
School) and two schools in New Mexico (Albuquerque Indian School and Santa Fe Indian 
School). Through this comparative analysis, Woolford contends that while the Canadian 
and	U.S.	systems	were	different	in	many	ways,	both	Canada	and	the	United	States	aggressively
pushed residential schooling for the purpose of “destroy[ing] Indigenous groups 
as groups” (93-4). Furthermore, Woolford analyzes these schools to demonstrate how 
different	 assimilative	practices	were	enforced,	made	flexible,	 and	 resisted	 in	order	 to	
 Book Reviews 121
contract	and	expand	the	settler-colonial	mesh,	rendering	it	always	in	flux.	Here,	Woolford	
enters into conversation with scholars of the American Indian boarding schools, such as 
K. Tsianina Lomawaima and Brenda Child, by exhibiting how some students and parents 
took advantage of the porousness of the settler colonial mesh by resisting, or by taking 
advantage of, a Euro-American education. 
Woolford not only contributes to the study of Indigenous boarding schools, but also 
to genocide studies, as he uses the histories of the boarding schools to show how nonhuman
actors	can	play	a	role	in	genocide.	Specifically,	Woolford	discusses	the	roles	of	
food-scarcity, land/territory, and disease in the cultural genocide of Indigenous peoples. 
Woolford argues that geography has generally been overlooked in genocide studies, and 
outlines the various roles that geography played in how administrators attempted to control 
the student body. However, as Woolford illustrates, geography also allowed Indigenous 
communities	to	influence	and	sometimes	manipulate	school	administrations.	
This Benevolent Experiment concludes with an analysis of how Canada has attempted
to unravel the settler colonial mesh. Woolford takes a close look at Canada’s 
Indian Residential School Settlement Agreement (IRSSA) passed in 2006, Indigenous 
reactions to the Agreement, Prime Minister Harper’s subsequent national apology, and 
the possible reasons why the United States has not followed Canada in similar reparations.
Woolford argues that the United States lags behind Canada in reparations because 
of the U.S. boarding schools’ perceived use of “softer” assimilation techniques marked 
by fewer reported cases of physical and sexual abuse. However, Woolford asks his readers
not to glorify Canada’s IRSSA, as it “might be enlisted as…another mutation of the 
settler colonial mesh” (293). In order for the government to allocate reparations, it must 
make individuals’ trauma measurable and calculable, which unburdens the government 
but re-victimizes survivors. Woolford calls on Canada to “decolonize redress” through a 
consideration of collective, rather than individual, approaches to reparations. 
Both scholars of the North American Indigenous boarding schools and scholars 
of genocide studies have much to gain from This Benevolent Experiment, including the 
introduction of the “settler colonial mesh” as a framework for conceptualizing cultural 
genocide, and an insight on the ways that non-human actors can play a role in genocide. 
In applying genocide studies to the study of boarding schools, and boarding school studies
to	the	study	of	genocide,	Woolford	offers	a	valuable	contribution	to	both	disciplines.	
Sarah K.P. Hayes Seminole State College
BY ANY MEDIA NECESSARY: The New Youth Activism. By Henry Jenkins, Sangita 
Shresthova, Liana Gamber-Thompson, Neta Kligler-Vilenchik, Arely Zimmerman. New 
York: NYU Press. 2016.
“By Any Media Necessary” pushes the reader into brand new territory by making 
cogent and beautifully illustrated points about the myriad of ways in which today’s youth 
have	“refreshed	and	renewed	the	public’s	symbolic	power	as	they	fight	for	social	justice”	
(Jenkins	et	al,	2)	specifically	by	exploring	the	connections	and	subsequent	changes	made	
by like-minded youth who are able to coalesce through social media. In this vital, exciting 
text, Jenkins et al take pains to illuminate connections between such disparate groups 
as Invisible Children, those who identify as DREAMers, young American Muslims, the 
Harry Potter Alliance and young Libertarians, proving both the power and problems that 
come when youth heartily embrace cultural disruption through the use of new media. 
Jenkins et al make absolutely certain the reader knows that while the communities 
studied intentionally span a broad “ideological, sociological, geographical and community 
 122 Book Reviews
based spectrum,” they share important traits such as “a strong emphasis on personal and 
collective storytelling” (13). By utilizing forms of new media (like YouTube and Facebook),
youth activists can personalize their messages, and subsequently send these often 
deeply	personal	treatises	across	the	globe	in	a	flash	in	order	to	draw	attention	to	varied	
political and social justice causes. The innovative actions presented in this text represent 
a sharp but welcome break from the activism of decades past. 
“Participatory politics” is an important term throughout the text. Its inclusion 
signals a change from “participatory culture,” where youth acted under the guidance of 
institutions, to linked-in cyberspaces where youth connect with one another in order to 
facilitate changes in the real world on their own terms. By bypassing the establishment 
in favor of a more collective, hands-on approach, youth are using the unique tools at their 
disposal to bring about such diverse ends as raising money and awareness to try and oust 
an African warlord, donating a massive amount of money to OxFam, connecting young 
Muslims post-9/11 and allowing DREAMers to achieve solidarity by “coming out” as 
undocumented online. 
Jenkins et al expands the model by labeling what they uncover as a “more participatory
culture,”	(emphasis	more)	by	explicitly	stating	that	the	difference	between	the	old	
definition	and	the	new	definition	is	that	a	more participatory culture “is one where the 
people have access to the means of cultural production and circulation and one where key 
decisions are made with the active and expanded participation of community members” 
(41). The book does an excellent job of showing how our expanded technological network 
allows culturally engaged young people to become more active citizens. This does not 
mean the road is easy, however, and Jenkins et al are adept at pointing out the spaces in 
which young activists have to struggle. But by skillfully identifying the limiting factors 
affecting	participatory	politics,	Jenkins	et	al	have	created	an	invaluable	resource	for	future	
activists who would seek to organize in new ways. 
Young agitators caught in the present are actively working to forge a future by listening
and adapting now, as opposed to relying on the same actions again and again. By 
creating deliberate public spaces that do not shy away from making the personal political, 
or even by closely allying their pop culture interests with real world concerns, Jenkins et 
al shows that youth are working hard at establishing alternatives to past forms of activism 
by tapping into models which actively encourage young people to use their collective 
power as citizens. This is achieved through what the text cites as a shifting participatory 
model, moving from the “informed citizen” (one who possesses full knowledge of an 
issue) to the newer “motivated citizen,” who is not only constantly tuned in to the larger 
world through social media, but also galvanized to further action by the unique connections
they can make with other like-minded youth through the internet.
It’s encouraging to see that egalitarian models of youthful civic engagement are 
emerging	as	respected	and	valuable	ways	of	making	a	difference.	“By	Any	Media	Necessary”
highlights a kind of inclusive activism that is poised to foster a collective identity, 
one that is focused on a moral connection to community and by extension, the world. 
Carolyn	Marcille	 Buffalo	State	College
DANGEROUS GROUNDS: Antiwar	Coffeehouses	and	Military	Dissent	in	the	Vietnam	
Era. David L. Parsons. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press. 2017.
In Dangerous Grounds, David L. Parsons adds a valuable perspective to the evolving
scholarship on the antiwar GI-movement during the Vietnam War. Following schol-
ars such as Christian Appy and Penny Lewis, whose work has challenged popular ste-
 Book Reviews 123
reotypes about the class and racial composition of the larger antiwar movement, Parsons 
focuses	on	a	network	of	GI	coffeehouses	 that	proliferated	 in	military	 towns	between	
1968	and	1974.	Like	the	GI	movement	itself,	the	coffeehouse	network	reflected	a	decentralized,
but	not	disconnected	set	of	local	initiatives	contributing	to	the	antiwar	effort.	
Part	of	what	makes	 the	movement	 so	 significant	 is	how	coffeehouses	became	spaces	
for GIs to organize resistance in a climate of countercultural comfort. At the same time, 
Parsons	makes	clear	that	the	coffeehouses	became	sites	of	both	racial	and	class	conflict,	
as well as targets of government surveillance and policing. 
Parsons begins his story with Fred Gardner, who believed stopping the war in Vietnam
meant building “an antiwar movement within the army” (16, italicized in original). 
Taking	inspiration	from	radical	coffeehouses	in	San	Francisco,	where	he	lived,	Gardner
decided to open “The UFO” outside Fort Jackson in Columbia, South Carolina in 
1967.	He	believed	a	“hip	antiwar	coffeehouse,	designed	for	GIs,	might	be	an	effective	
way of starting conversations between antiwar soldiers and civilians” (17). The UFO 
soon caught the attention of national organizations, which began supporting more coffeehouses.
The chapter introduces the UFO, the Oleo Strut outside Fort Hood in Killeen, 
Texas, and the Shelter Half outside Fort Lewis in Tacoma, Washington, which are the 
main sites explored in the book. 
In	chapter	two,	Parsons	describes	the	role	of	these	coffeehouses	during	significant	
episodes of the GI movement, such as the Fort Jackson Eight, when GI resisters fought 
the army for First Amendment rights to oppose the war. He also relates the Fort Hood 43 
case, when a large group of black soldiers refused mobilization for riot control duty outside
the 1968 Democratic convention in Chicago. This chapter also details other ways 
the	coffeehouses	supported	acts	of	resistance,	including	peace	marches,	local	boycotts,	
and counterculture demonstrations. 
While	chapter	two	begins	documenting	attacks	on	the	coffeehouse	movement,	the	
third chapter pulls local and national acts of repression into focus. The House Un-American
Activities Committee (HUAC) questioned them prior to the Chicago Eight trial in 
1968, and the Committee on Internal Security followed in 1971. Police intimidation and 
harassment was routine. Legal charges mounted and created expenses that undermined 
business,	particularly	for	the	UFO.	J.	Edgar	Hoover	directed	FBI	field	offices	to	use	drug	
charges	to	target	coffeehouse	proprietors,	and	sent	in	undercover	agents.	
In	his	fourth	chapter,	Parsons	traces	the	changing	character	of	the	GI	and	coffeehouse
movement	after	Nixon’s	election	in	1968.	He	explains	how	the	coffeehouses	nour-
ished the GI underground press, but also reveals the increasing visibility of racial and 
class tensions inside them. He notes that just when “black GIs were becoming the driving
force	of	GI	activism,	the	stereotypical	image	of	coffeehouses	as	hangouts	for	middle-
class peace activists presented a distinct challenge for GI organizers” (99). Drugs, youth 
culture,	and	finances	all	challenged	coffeehouse	staff.	Perhaps	more	than	anything	else,	
however, Nixon’s Vietnamization strategy, which withdrew 400,000 American soldiers 
by 1971, led to fewer patrons. In some sense, the movement became a victim of its own 
success. 
Dangerous Grounds pairs well with Beth Bailey’s history of the transition to the 
all-volunteer army, but the book’s audience goes beyond historians of the GI movement 
and the Vietnam War. Although he doesn’t explicitly engage with the question of masculinity,
Parsons’ history complements Anne Enke’s work on the creation of alternative 
public spaces during the rise of second-wave feminism. Twentieth century scholars of 
American studies interested in radical labor, black power, social movements, and even 
racialized	policing	will	find	it	relevant.	Further,	it	points	toward	projects	investigating	
 124 Book Reviews
the close ties between police, military and business communities in the postwar era, in 
part through regional examples of what’s generalized as the military-industrial complex. 
Justin Rogers-Cooper City University of New York, LaGuardia Community College
TURNS OF EVENT: Nineteenth-Century American Literary Studies in Motion. Edited 
by Hester Blum. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 2016. 
When does a turn constitute a new direction, and when does a turn require a look back? 
These are questions that contributors to Turns of Event: Nineteenth-Century American 
Literary Studies in Motion address through a sustained and cautious examination of the 
concept of a critical “turn.” Through what editor Hester Blum calls the “meta-disciplinary 
reflections”	collected	in	this	volume,	contributors,	all	established	scholars,	propose	a	critical
lexicon of the conceptual and theoretical moves that constitute the work of literary 
and cultural studies of the long nineteenth century (2). 
As Blum notes in her introduction, the essays focus less on the “particularity” of 
various turns and more on the “propensity of C19 literary studies to desire revolutionary 
movement, to join broader critical interests in turning as a way to reject stasis, to signal 
newness” (4). These “broader critical interests” include turns already made in cultural 
studies	overall.	Evidence	of	a	digital	 turn	organizes	 the	first	half	of	 the	collection,	 in	
which	Geoffrey	Sanborn	reflects	on	the	importance	of	face-to-face	classrooms,	Meredith	
McGill	 reconfigures	 book	history	within	 the	field	of	 comparative	media	 studies,	 and	
Martin Brückner examines the metaphors and materials of cartography, digital or otherwise.
The second half of the volume is dedicated to positioning American literary studies 
within the transnational turn. Michelle Burnham proposes that, as part of this movement, 
a turn toward the oceanic can open land-locked U.S. literary histories to an “alternative 
dimensionality” that “emphasizes America’s ongoing material connectedness with the 
rest of the globe” (153, 155).
In interrogating the consequences of these and other turns, contributors advise against 
a “‘fashionable fascination’” with critical “fads” (42, 3). As Sean Goudie cautions of the 
recent surge of interest in Caribbean studies, scholars must be careful of “half turns,” of 
underestimating the power of re-turning to yet unrealized stories and histories of U.S.Caribbean
interactions (135). But as Christopher Castiglia demonstrates, historicizing 
the concept of a turn has the power to reinvest critical work with the “hope” central to its 
vision,	the	dissatisfaction	that	motivates	scholarship	to	pursue	“a	differently	functioning	
version of the real” (62, 69) As Ralph Bauer argues, a turn does not “make an absolute 
and exclusive claim to truth,” but remains committed to “critical debate and ‘dialogue’ 
. . . that puts considerations of subject positions at its front and center” (93, 94). A turn, 
then, in Monique Allewaert’s words, “evokes a partiality,” a willingness to explore a new 
direction, in its knowns and especially in its unknowns (111). 
Throughout, Turns of Evens remains committed to dissecting the concept of the turn, 
but not in so narrow a way that it limits its relevance to cultural studies and the humanities 
at large. For, here, the “literary” is also understood as multidimensional, as an interdisciplinary
method of examining a range of “subject positions.” Contributors prove that 
the “critical mobility” of American literary studies is characteristic of humanistic inquiry 
more broadly, a mobility ever expanding to the global yet committed to interrogating the 
terms that dictate a turn (2).
Amanda Stuckey York College of Pennsylvania 
 Book Reviews 125
JUST ANOTHER SOUTHERN TOWN: Mary Church Terrell and the Struggle for Racial
Justice in the Nation’s Capitol. By Joan Quigley. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 2016. 
Joan Quigley’s Just Another Southern Town is an engaging and well-researched 
book on the civil rights activism of Mary Church Terrell in Washington, DC. Terrell 
was	an	important	figure	in	the	black	freedom	struggle,	yet	her	activism	remains	understudied.
Quigley’s book thus seeks to redress this gap in the literature. It reveals how 
the	issue	of	segregation—and	Terrell’s	fight	against	it	in	the	courts—was	central	to	the	
modern movement in the immediate post-World War Two era. The book opens with the 
moment in January 1950 when Terrell was refused service in a restaurant. The rest of 
the book details how Terrell came to be a civil rights activist and what happened when 
she took the restaurant to court to challenge Washington’s segregation laws. Indeed, as 
Quigley notes, the nation’s capital had, since the days of Reconstruction, functioned as 
a “vanguard and testing ground, heralding reforms before the rest of the nation.” (8)
Mary Church Terrell’s life spanned nearly a century, from the era of Civil War 
and slave emancipation to Brown versus Board of Education, the 1954 legal case that 
declared segregation unconstitutional. Terrell was born in Memphis, Tennessee in 1863 
to parents who had once been slaves. Mary was educated at Oberlin College and after 
graduating in 1884 she travelled around Europe. Upon her return, Terrell taught at Wilberforce
University, and after moving to Washington, DC, she taught high school for a 
few years. In 1891, Mary married Robert Terrell, a Washington-based lawyer, and the 
couple settled in the nation’s capital. Robert became a district judge and was active 
within the Republican Party. Both Mary and Robert were active Republicans (although 
Mary switched her allegiance to the Democrats in 1952), and Quigley’s book explores 
the broader relationship between African Americans and the Republican Party, especially
in the era of Theodore Roosevelt and William Howard Taft. This reviewer, however, 
was left wanting a little more in the book on the Republican Party’s often contradictory 
stance on race relations, particularly during the 1920s.
The central focus of the book, however, is Terrell’s legal case in the early 1950s, 
and Quigley’s account of how the case panned out is detailed and riveting. Quigley does 
a good job of revealing a complex (and, as it emerges, a relatively privileged) individual 
who became more radicalized during the World War Two era. As Terrell put it in 1949, 
“we are tired of being patient with being pushed around.” (140) What Quigley’s book 
achieves is a richly woven narrative that places the Civil Rights Movement within a 
much longer time-frame, which connects the Reconstruction era with the 1950s. The 
book is also a reminder of both the central role played by African American women in 
the Civil Rights Movement, and the crucial role of the U.S. Supreme Court in the history
of	civil	rights.	Quigley	has	done	a	fine	service	of	revealing	how	segregation	was	
challenged in the nation’s capital and the centrality of Mary Church Terrell to that story.
Stephen Robinson York St. John University, UK
FROM STOREFRONT TO MONUMENT: Tracing the Public History of the Black Museum
Movement. By Andrea A. Burns. Amherst and Boston: University of Massachu-
setts. 2013.
In 2016, the Smithsonian’s National Museum of African American History and 
Culture, located on the National Mall in Washington, DC, opened its doors to an enthu-
 126 Book Reviews
siastic public. This spectacular museum is a part of a rich legacy of African American 
museums that often began with little to no funding in small neighborhood buildings. 
The radical social and political changes of the 1960s that gave rise to the Black 
Power Movement also fostered another site of black empowerment: the new black 
neighborhood museum (4-7). In From Storefront to Monument: Tracing the Public History
of the Black Museum Movement, Andrea A. Burns examines the Black Museum 
Movement primarily through the history of the DuSable Museum, in Chicago, the International
Afro-American Museum (now the Charles H. Wright Museum of African 
American History) in Detroit; the Anacostia Neighborhood (now Community) Museum 
in Washington, D.C.; and the American Museum of Philadelphia, opened in Pennsylvania
in 1976. Burns analyzes archival materials that foreground the complexities and 
tensions that surfaced among museum administrators, community leaders, and residents 
during the Black Museum Movement while contextualizing the shifts in geography and 
politics that made African American museums dynamic sites of knowledge.
Burns’s introduction centers around a meeting of individuals in New York discussing
how traditional museums would remain “relevant” in the midst of the black freedom 
struggle. June Jordan rejected any compromise equivalent to the “nigger room” in a 
traditional museum.This meeting became an important part of an ongoing conversation 
about African American museums and their roles in society (1-2).Who will tell African 
American stories? Which will become a part of our national narrative? Where will these 
stories be told, and who will access and interpret them? 
The book includes “origin stories” of the three aforementioned museums established
in the 1960s. Burns, for example, chronicles the programmatic shifts in Chicago’s 
DuSable Museum. In 1961, the exhibits were initially non-confrontational, designed 
without yet “challeng[ing] traditional representations. . . . ” Curators used what Burns 
calls a ‘we, too, were here’ approach so that black contributions became a more surface 
part of the national narrative. Then exhibitions began to “revise” misinformation and became
quite “political” as with sculptor Bob James’s dioramas in 1968 (73-74 ). In chap-
ter three, Burns includes a poignant example of“bottom-up” leadership at the Anacostia 
Museum. Local children, afraid of rats in their schools, inspired The Rat exhibit which 
addressed	a	bonafide	social	problem	while	teaching	local	children	about	rats	(93-96).	
Burns has presented a well-research and insightful study that recognizes the vital 
role of the Black Museum Movement in producing a robust public history. The text 
would be appropriate for undergraduate courses in Museum studies, African American 
history, or American studies and would also be an excellent resource for individuals who 
wish	to	establish	community	museums	or	understand	the	historic	significance	and	inner	
workings of museums.
Zanice Bond Tuskegee University
PART OF OUR LIVES: A People’s History of the American Public Library. By Wayne 
A. Wiegand. New York: Oxford University Press. 2015.
In the spirit of Howard Zinn’s A People’s History of the United States, Wayne A. 
Wiegand draws on library records, newspaper accounts, and the professional journals of 
librarians to present the public library as a contested space across lines of race, gender, 
class, sexuality, and age. Wiegand begins with Benjamin Franklin’s establishment of 
the Library Company of Philadelphia in 1732, which Franklin hoped would inform and 
empower	a	community	of	“self-made”	colonial	men	(and	which	ultimately	offered	its	assistance
to the writers of the U.S. Constitution). In what became a recurring theme among 
 Book Reviews 127
subsequent	librarians,	Franklin	rejected	fiction,	instead	preferring	to	collect	books	that	
offered	so-called	“useful	knowledge.”	This	judgment,	on	both	books	and	their	readers,	
proved elitist and sexist, and it was overruled, again and again, by popular demand. After 
all,	as	Wiegand	notes,	novels	were	empowering	companions	for	different	subsets	of	library	
users, including women, people of color, youth, and the working classes. 
As a study of libraries (and librarians, as their gatekeepers), Part of Our Lives is 
largely a history of clashes over censorship and First Amendment rights—and over the 
uses of community spaces more broadly. American libraries have provided public platforms
for the Humane Society, Amnesty International, and the National Organization 
for Women, as well as for neo-Nazis (and groups protesting against them). At various 
points in U.S. history, librarians have banned Mark Twain, Harry Potter, and suspected 
communist sympathizers—and proudly defended the availability of Mein Kampf. In more 
recent decades, libraries across the country have celebrated “Banned Books Week” to 
draw attention to censorship debates and their history—a history that Wiegand traces 
through a series of cultural, political, and technological changes. 
In Part of Our Lives, the central questions that frame the history of American public 
libraries ask which public(s) they should serve—and how. In the Jim Crow South, for 
example, libraries enforced racial segregation and promoted pro-Confederate historical 
narratives.	Librarians	who	spoke	out	against	segregation	were	fired	or	threatened,	and	
anti-racist librarians struggled at various points even to identify and stock titles that featured
people of color without negative racial stereotypes. Unquestionably, libraries, like 
many other public institutions, perpetuated white supremacy both directly and indirectly, 
but they also served as spaces of resistance to it. In addition to a powerful anecdote that 
Wiegand	relays	about	the	author	Richard	Wright,	public	libraries	offered	meeting	spaces	
for civil rights organizations, were the targets of civil rights protest campaigns, and, today, 
serve as memorials to those struggles. 
Libraries	have	similarly	reflected	the	country’s	relationship	to	poverty,	 including	
debates over whether or not to keep them open late enough to be accessible to workers, 
public disgust at libraries’openness to homeless populations, and attempts to open new 
branches and reach rural areas with bookmobiles. Library funding was a key component 
of both the New Deal of the 1930s and the War on Poverty of the 1960s, and cutting it 
has been a frequent topic of policy and discussion in the post-1960s period.
Part of Our Lives is a love letter to U.S. libraries, warts and all, and a helpful study 
in both the hopeful promises and the ugly failures of the American democratic experiment. 
Appropriately, children and teenagers have been central to the missions of public libraries
for the last century. Libraries, Wiegand argues, were, collectively, one of the arenas 
in which U.S. history was decided. The nation’s investment (or lack thereof) in the next 
generation through libraries will make them equally important to its future. 
Dawson Barrett Del Mar College
DAMNED NATION: Hell in America from the Revolution to Reconstruction. By Kathryn
Gin Lum. New York: Oxford University Press. 2014.
The ways communities developed the theological concept of hell, Kathryn Gin 
Lum’s meticulously researched Damned Nation reveals, played a central social and political
role from the emergence of the U.S. American republic through the Civil War. 
Unlike in post-Enlightenment Europe, belief in hell occupied the dominant and respectable
religious position in antebellum America. Gin Lum’s central argument is that hell 
mattered in the United States and shaped communal life in the emerging nation. 
 128 Book Reviews
Following in the way that the scholar of religion Robert Orsi approaches the interconnections
between history, religious studies, and theology, Gin Lum takes seri-
ously the stories antebellum individuals and communities told about themselves and 
their realities. The questions Gin Lum poses—What does living with the fear of hell 
feel like? What responsibilities do belief in the existence of hell imply? What did it feel 
like to reject the dominant worldview that hell was real?—emerge out of these antebellum
stories (239-40). Gin Lum draws on a variety of sources, including sermons, tracts, 
and material artifacts, to unearth how the prospect of damnation shaped how people 
established notions of community, distinguished themselves from others, and ultimately 
structured their social and political lives in the emerging nation. Importantly, Gin Lum 
also investigates the question of why Americans believed in hell—that is, she questions 
what accounted, in various contexts, for this particular American focus on hell. In doing 
so,	she	brings	out	ways	individuals	and	communities	disagreed	on	the	significance	and	
reality	of	hell,	and	how	they	deployed	the	threat	of	hell	for	different	ends.	Forms	of	dissent
from dominant and respectable evangelical understandings of hell interacted with 
established social, cultural, and political categories in ways that shaped group identity.
Gin Lum considers, for example, ways Native American revitalization prophets 
opened	up	the	idea	that	God	gave	different	revelations	to	different	people.	Hell	for	Native
American prophets such as Neolin, Handsome Lake, and Tenskwatawa, as well 
as for less prominent Native laypeople, was typically not tethered to an understanding
of	biblical	morality.	Hell	and	damnation	were	deployed	from	a	different	corpus	of	
revelation	than	the	reading	of	the	Bible	offered	by	White	Christian	missionaries.	They	
deployed hell as a call to avoid assimilation to missionaries’ agendas. At the same time, 
the threat of hell functioned for Native revitalization prophets in a similar way that it did 
for Euro-American Christians: it established group identity, patterns of behavior, and 
provided a way to describe their enemies (132). 
Similarly, abolitionists and proslavery groups prior to and during the Civil War deployed
the	threat	of	hell	for	different	ends.	White	abolitionists	used	hell	within	paternalistic	
arguments that slaves needed the abolitionists’ intervention for their salvation. Slavery 
apologists drew on the image of hell to claim that slavery was consistent with the Bible 
and could hasten the salvation of the slaves. Former slave Frederick Douglass employed 
hell to criticize Christian hypocrisy, while former slave Henry Highland Garnet deployed 
the threat of damnation to urge slaves to use every means to defy slavery. In each of these 
cases, parties used hell to condemn the nation as a whole in the process of forwarding 
particular political options: the United States was a “damned nation.”
In the end, Gin Lum convincingly shows that hell failed to decline in the United States 
with the dawn of the Enlightenment. The malleable trope of a “damned nation” continued 
to play a political and social role in the United States beyond the Civil War. By bringing 
together the study of history, religion, and theology, Gin Lum provides a portrait of the 
early American republic that enters into the worldviews of individuals and communities 
between the Revolution and Reconstruction. The narratives Gin Lum unearths and the way 
she weaves these narratives into theoretical frameworks make Damned Nation a valuable 
resource for scholars studying U.S. social, political, and religious realties. 
Joseph Drexler-Dreis Saint Mary’s College of California
 Book Reviews 129
MAVERICKS, MONEY, AND MEN: The AFL, Black Players, and the Evolution of 
Modern Football. By Charles K. Ross. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press. 2016.
It	may	be	difficult	to	imagine	the	National	Football	League,	the	American	sports	
behemoth of our time, competing with a legitimate rival organization. Yet such a challenger
existed for most of the 1960s, and the story of the American Football League is 
documented by Charles K. Ross in Mavericks, Money, and Men: The AFL, Black Players, 
and the Evolution of Modern Football.	Ross	lays	out	his	thesis	on	the	first	page:	“the	
AFL was fundamentally responsible for facilitating the evolution of modern professional 
football in America.” As indicated by the title, he devotes particular attention to the 
league’s provision of opportunities for Black players, including those from Historically 
Black Colleges and Universities, who had been largely ignored by NFL owners. Other 
forward-thinking AFL initiatives included the equal sharing of television revenue among 
teams, the addition of players’ last names on jerseys, and the two-point conversion. In 
general, Ross argues, AFL owners led the way into football’s television era, setting up 
the ascent of the NFL following the leagues’ eventual merger.
The book opens with the AFL origin story: Lamar Hunt, trust-funded son of an oil 
tycoon,	organized	a	new	football	league	after	failed	efforts	at	becoming	an	NFL	team	
owner. From there, readers follow a chronologically organized account of the AFL’s rise 
and evolution, including ongoing battles between the two leagues’ owners as they vied 
for talented players and television deals. Ross contextualizes these events within larger 
U.S. Black-politics developments, though at times the connection between the two is 
unclear (for example, I was left wondering: what exactly is the relationship between 
the “Freedom Summer,” to which a separate paragraph is devoted, and happenings in 
the	AFL?).	In	any	case,	he	notes	the	significance	of	Black	players	not	only	entering	the	
field,	but	occasionally	doing	so	in	the	central	strategic	positions,	quarterback	and	middle	
linebacker,	long	reserved	for	White	players.	In	the	final	chapters,	the	AFL’s	long-term	
significance	is	highlighted	by	its	merger	with	the	NFL	and	the	subsequent	creation	of	
the	Super	Bowl,	now	the	epitomic	confluence	of	sport,	commodity,	and	national	ritual.	
Cultural	 studies	 scholars	may	find	 that	 the	book	 leaves	 room	 for	 further	 critical	
analysis and discussion. For example, it is demonstrated that professional football players 
gained	significant	bargaining	leverage	(on	salary	and	other	interests)	due	to	NFL	and	AFL	
owners’ need to compete for their services; furthermore, AFL players created a Players 
Association, further solidifying such leverage. These developments merit discussion of 
implications regarding laborer-owner relationships in sport capitalism, particularly as they 
occurred	ahead	of	the	more	famous	labor	fights	of	baseball	player	Curt	Flood	and	others.	
Furthermore, this class issue can be directly connected to race: while it is important to 
acknowledge the greater opportunities for Black players in the AFL, as well as their successful
demand to move the 1965 All-Star Game out of New Orleans (following instances 
of direct racial discrimination in the city), the league was still governed by an all-White 
commissioner, ownership, and Players Association. A discussion of such White hegemony 
would further connect the AFL to the present-day NFL, a league in which White capitalists
continue to preside over Black-majority players, and have apparently blackballed 
(as of September 2017) quarterback Colin Kaepernick following his national-anthem 
protest of racism in law enforcement. Finally, the “Men” in the book’s title points to an 
opportunity for gender analysis: in a male-exclusive league, how did the various actors 
come to understand themselves (and be understood) as men in the course of circulating 
and performing masculinity?  
 130 Book Reviews
While tending away from such discussion, Ross presents a well-organized, wellevidenced
account of the AFL’s operation as a somewhat muted version of 1960s counter-
culture.	The	book	is	probably	best	fit	for	the	reader	who	brings	some	interest	in	football,	
given the play-by-play descriptions of seasons and important games, though it should 
have appeal for anyone curious about the intersection of sport and racial politics. The 
text’s	accessibility	and	subject	matter	also	render	it	a	good	fit	for	undergraduate	classes	
in sport history, particularly those with sections focused on identity. In sum, Mavericks, 
Money, and Men sheds light on a crucial turning point in U.S. sport history, in which 
television-obsessed American began to turn to football as the new national pastime, and 
takes	us	straight	onto	the	“field”	for	a	better	view	of	such	change.
Steve Marston Independent Scholar
THE CONSTRUCTION OF WHITENESS: An Interdisciplinary Analysis of Race Formation
and the Meaning of a White Identity. Edited by Stephen Middleton, David R. Roediger, 
and	Donald	M.	Shaffer.	Jackson:	University	of	Mississippi	Press.	2016.
At the current historical juncture, when white identity has unabashedly misappropriated
racial	victimhood	and	asserted	itself	as	a	point	of	pride,	this	collection	of	essays	offers	
more than a theoretical examination of the dominant ideology underpinning American 
culture. The case studies in this volume provide concrete illustrations of how whiteness 
and its privilege are institutionalized in American society, over and against racial others. 
By demonstrating that white identity is constructed and maintained in service of power, 
each essay examines the meaning of whiteness and challenges the assumption that white 
entitlements occur naturally. 
Although	this	argument	flows	from	a	well-established	body	of	scholarship	on	whiteness,
the	collection	offers	a	timely	intervention,	recalibrated	for	the	special	demands	of	
twenty-first	century	politics.	As	its	title	suggests,	the	collection’s	interdisciplinary	breadth	
underscores	the	important	fact	that	whiteness	finds	traction	in	values	and,	thereby,	reproduces
itself throughout culture. In these essays, scholars of history, sociology, literature, 
law,	economics,	and	psychology,	using	different	methodological	approaches,	examine	
racial construction and the ideology of whiteness within a variety of cultural contexts 
and from multiple academic vantages.
There is no weak essay among the nine in the volume and the themes deserve 
particular mention. These include chapters that reexamine the politics of passing and 
the social meaning attached to mixed-race identity. A particularly strong contribution in 
this vein, Erica Cooper’s essay tracing one-drop reasoning in the law, explores the white 
preoccupation	with	invisible	blackness.	Donald	Shaffer’s	essay	on	mulatto	identity	in	the	
fiction	of	Charles	W.	Chestnutt	also	expands	our	understanding	of	the	representation	of	
racial (im)purity in literature.
Several essays—those by Cooper and Steven Middleton, look at legal constructions
of whiteness, while Robert Westley discusses the economics of slavery and David 
Roediger looks at the impact of emancipation on labor activism and veteran disability 
on	the	post-Civil	War	workforce.	The	psychology	of	whiteness	figures	in	Tim	Engles’s	
discussion of literature and masculine identity and in Becky Thompson and Veronica 
Watson’s theorization of white racial trauma.
Most unexpected is Sadhana Bery’s “Making Whiteness in Reenactments of Slavery,” 
an exploration of the startling phenomenon of “living history” installations that presumably 
reproduce	the	slave	auction	and	flight	from	captivity	through	the	underground	railroad.	
 Book Reviews 131
In these entertainment venues, white visitors seek the vicarious experience of African 
American bondage and terror.
In	addition	to	offering	a	deep	theoretical	grounding	in	whiteness	studies,	the	volume’s	
interdisciplinary approach also contributes to its utility in both the classroom and scholarship.
Although all of the essays are appropriate for interrogations of the construction of 
whiteness,	individual	chapters	may	be	used	for	discipline-specific	purposes.	The	contribution
that	offers	the	broadest	overview	may	be	Matthew	Hughey’s	essay	on	“Hegemonic	
Whiteness: From Structure and Agency to Identity Allegiance,” which theorizes white 
racial construction, incorporates case studies, and issues a call for additional research.
It is unusual to encounter a volume of scholarly essays that exhibit such uniform 
quality. Moreover, as a sum of its parts, this collection on The Construction of Whiteness
is	extraordinarily	cohesive	and	will	find	a	place	in	the	canon	on	whiteness.	Sadly,	
the	subject	matter	is	also	quite	topical	and	the	essays	offer	a	timely	intervention	in	both	
institutionalized white privilege and brazen assertions of white victimhood.
Gwyneth Mellinger James Madison University
GRAFFITI AND STREET ART: Reading, Writing and Representing the City. Edited by 
Konstantinos Avramidis and Myrto Tsilimpounidi. New York: Routledge. 2017.
In 2011 the revolutionary bodies that occupied Tahrir Square demanding the ouster 
of	Hosni	Mubarak	found	its	corollary	in	the	passionate,	angry,	sarcastic	and	funny	graffiti	
and street art on the walls of Mohammed Mahmoud street which lead into the Square. 
From	an	international	perspective,	graffiti	and	street	art	became	the	visual	background	
for	the	revolution	and	numerous	articles	and	books	highlighted	the	graffiti	and	street	art	
scene of this street during these days of rebellion. Many of these works, however, were 
written	by	scholars	not	familiar	with	the	history	of	graffiti	scholarship	and	they	made	
numerous assumptions that revealed (Western) biases and inaccuracies. Luckily, in recent 
years, there has been a number of articles and edited collections that have embraced the 
(international)	history	of	graffiti	and	street	art	and	have	offered	wonderful	contextual	
analysis of these words and images found on walls around the globe. Avramidis and 
Tsilimpounidi’s Graffiti and Street Art is one of the best. 
What makes this edited collection stand out is that a) the scholars are from a range 
of	disciplines	who	offer	analysis	from	a	variety	of	vantage	points,	b)	the	articles	highlight	
new	methodologies	 (most	 specifically	 digital	methodologies)	 to	 examine	graffiti	 and	
street art, and c) the case studies are from unrepresented places and populations. Taken 
separately,	each	article	is	a	superb	analysis	that	adds	insight	to	the	way	graffiti	and	street	
art	interact	with	a	specific	built	environment	of	a	city.	Taken	as	a	whole,	the	collection	
reads	the	city	as	a	performance	space	where	graffiti,	street	art	and	the	city	form	relationships
that create new and complex city spaces. While their claim that they are signaling 
the beginning of a “4th	wave”	(11)	of	graffiti	and	street	art	scholarship	is	a	bit	grandiose,	
the collection is an informative read.
All of the articles within the collection are strong although a few scholars stand out 
for their deep historicity while simultaneously introducing new readings and/or methodologies
of	graffiti	and	street	art:	Jeff	Ferrell	highlights	the	dialectic	nature	between	art	
and	action	that	is	the	essence	of	graffiti	and	street	art;	Kurt	Iveson,	using	the	theories	of	
Jacques	Rancière,	thinks	through	the	politics	of	graffiti	and	street	art	as	it	interacts	with	
cityscapes; Rafael Schacter lays bare the confusing and contradictory nature of classifying 
graffiti	and	street	art	as	‘art’;	Andrea	Brighenti	offers	a	wonderful	contextualization	of	
graffiti	within	the	public	sphere;	Mona	Abaza	highlights	the	issues	of	non-Cairene	scholars	
 132 Book Reviews
and	reporters	writing	about	the	graffiti	and	street	art	movement	in	Egypt	without	proper	
understanding	of	place;	Lachlan	Macdowall	examines	graffiti	and	street	art	produced	as	
digital	objects,	opening	up	the	field	to	new	avenues	of	exploration.	All	of	these	articles	
(and many more from the 15 articles in the collection) are excellent additions to the study 
of	graffiti	and	street	art	and	point	to	new	horizons	of	inquiry.
I	can	offer	no	criticisms	of	this	wonderful	collection	that	Avramidis	and	Tsilimpounidi	
have edited (except for its $150 price tag). Graffiti and Street Art is a needed and welcome 
collection	for	the	field	of	graffiti	and	street	art.
John Lennon University of South Florida
THE CITY SINCE 9/11: Literature, Film, Television. Edited by Keith Wilhite. Lanham: 
Fairleigh Dickenson UP. 2016.
With	specific	attention	on	the	metropolis,	the	last	fifteen	years	have	seen	several	
publications regarding changes to the post-9/11 urban environment. The City Since 9/11 
joins the list by gathering a diverse collection of essays with an overarching theme of 
looking at “the city as a contested site” (3). The connection Keith Wilhite establishes 
between the sixteen articles is their aim to examine “the city as a crossroads for local 
and global discourses about human precarity, the social life of the public sphere, state 
power, economic inequality, and future crises” (17); unfortunately, these tasks create such 
a wide gamut that the collection fails to provide any cohesion. The broadest consistency 
within these assorted articles is that they do indeed focus on major cities as represented 
in	literature,	film,	and	television	after September 11, 2001, but not all the articles provide 
valuable interpretations of the city since 9/11. There is a sense that these assorted articles 
lack a direct focus in elucidating how cities have become contested in the wake of post9/11
transformations.
Taken individually, however, there are several articles containing meaningful additions
to the discussion of early 21st	Century	metropolitan	literature,	film,	and	television.	
There are a handful of articles that concentrate on works not often appearing in extended 
critical analysis. For example, there is noteworthy interpretation of Colson Whitehead’s 
Zone One (2011) and the weaknesses of our cities, while William Gibson’s Blue Any 
Trilogy (2003–10) is examined through its depiction of global homesickness, brought on 
by	the	numerous	possibilities	of	the	global	world.	Additionally,	the	film	and	television	
section contains articles that focus on “excess of representation” (199) in Alfonso Cuarón’s
film,	Children of Men (2006), while two Scandinavian crime dramas, The Bridge 
(2011–13) and The Killing (2007–12) are assessed for their representations of abject space 
in Copenhagen. Multiple authors do, however, place their attention on some commonly 
examined metropolitan texts of the 21st Century, including Teju Cole’s Open City (2011), 
Jonathan Safran Foer’s Extremely Loud & Incredibly Close (2005), and Joseph O’Neill’s 
Netherland (2008). 
Wilhite states that the “since” in the title “implies an examination of the city attuned to 
its	history”	(2);	yet,	the	articles	often	fail	to	highlight	a	clearly	defined	shift	in	time—there	
is	insufficient	contrast	or	distinction	provided	for	the	reader	to	demonstrate	the	changed	
environment	after	9/11,	and	therefore	the	significance	of	“since”	does	not	clearly	come	
across as a shift in metropolitan identity. Indeed, certain issues covered were contested 
topics and themes before 9/11. What we fail to discern through substantial investigation 
is how things have really changed. It does not strike me that this volume—in its totality—greatly
adds to the rapidly expanding analysis of our global cities with an eye to 
post-9/11 transformations. In fact, there is more than one article contained within where 
 Book Reviews 133
the	phrase	“post-9/11”	seems	inserted	merely	to	create	the	semblance	of	fitting	in	with	the	
title of the book. Perhaps Wilhite’s breadth is a tad too far-ranging in the incorporation 
of certain articles, therefore causing the collection to miss its mark. While all the articles 
are well written and contain soundly supported arguments, their accumulated failure to 
provide a broader, more cohesive, understanding of the city since 9/11 leaves this reader 
wondering why there was need to publish, in book format, these varied articles. 
Wayne E. Arnold The University of Kitakyushu, Japan
HEATHEN, HINDOO, HINDU: American Representations of India, 1721–1893. By 
Michael J. Altman. New York: Oxford University Press, 2017.
Michael J. Altman’s Heathen, Hindoo, Hindu: American Representations of India, 
1721-1893 begins and ends with Swami Vivekananda’s address to the 1893 World’s Parliament
of Religion. Many studies of American religion do the same, but Altman turns 
that traditional historical narrative on its head. Rather than see that 1893 event as the 
inaugural moment of Hinduism entering American religious discourse, Altman reads it 
as a culmination of more than a century of American engagement with Indian religion. 
Indeed,	one	of	the	many	contributions	the	book	brings	to	the	field	of	American	religious	
studies is to understand much American engagement with “Hinduism” as a construction 
of	various	and	conflicting	Indian	religious	representations	in	the	early	United	States.	
As	the	title	suggests,	Altman	is	not	engaging	with	a	fixed	religion	called	“Hinduism.”	
Instead, his book is a trenchant study of how “Americans used representations of India in 
their own constructions and arguments about ‘religion’” (140). Altman’s book analyzes 
“how Hinduism became conceivable in America,” providing a genealogy of thinkers and 
writers beginning in the late eighteenth century who used information about religion in 
India to construct various images of heathenism, bloody cult practices, mystical religion, 
and proto-Christianity (xx). Altman’s overriding point is that these constructions, whether 
labeled “heathen,” “Hindoo,” or something else, speak to how American thinkers wrestled 
with Christianity and the very idea of religion. 
Altman begins in the late eighteenth century, primarily New England, where Protestant
Christianity, and Enlightenment ideas of religion provide various early imaginings of 
Indian religious life. The Enlightenment strain of thinking comes through Hannah Adams’s 
frequently revised book An Alphabetical Compendium of the Various Sects Which Have 
Appeared in the World from the Beginning of the Christian Era to the Present Day, which 
attempted an “impartial and fair account of the world’s variety of theological positions” 
(11).	Despite	claims	of	impartiality,	Altman	argues	Adams’s	work	is	suffused	with	a	Protestant
Christian	understanding	of	religion	and,	like	other	figures	in	this	book,	uses	Indian	
religious practices to understand Euro-American ideas of monotheism and human reason. 
Next, Altman moves to Anglo-American missionary activity in the early nineteenth 
century, which produced a print culture describing global missionary work. Its picture of 
Indian religious practices was lurid. Evangelical readers saw practices such as “sati,” the 
immolation of widows on their husband’s funeral pyres, as signals of an innate depravity 
of Indian religious practice. This picture of a violent, sexual “Hindoo” religion stands 
in contradistinction to Rammohun Roy, a Bengali writer who argued for an essentially 
monotheistic	form	of	Hindoo	religion,	and	who	figured	 in	battles	between	Unitarians	
and Trinitarians in New England. In the national discourse, school textbooks and magazines
like Harper’s constructed a white, Protestant American nationhood where India 
often served as its backward opposite. Similarly, transcendentalists like Ralph Waldo 
Emmerson and Henry David Thoreau deployed India as the purest representation of a 
 134 Book Reviews
mystical, introverted, and ascetic “East” against a pragmatic and action-oriented “West” 
represented by the United States.
Later in the nineteenth century Madame Blavatsky’s Theosophical Society would 
find	in	India	the	source	of	“occult	power”	and	“esoteric	truths”	(99).	Yet	they	also	came	
into	unprecedented	conflict	with	actual	Indian	religious	practitioners,	finding	their	 inventions
of	Indian	religion	did	not	fit	with	Indian	traditions.	When	Altman	returns	the	
World’s Parliament of Religion in his last chapter, he therefore reads it (and its voluminous 
historiography) as a culmination of a century-long engagement with Indian religion.
Altman leaves the reader with important questions about alternative ways of doing 
American religious studies, about thinking genealogically rather than descriptively, and 
about	moving	away	from	fixed,	essential	definitions	of	religious	categories.	Returning	to	
Hannah Adams, Altman also reminds us that comparative religion and religious studies 
have a longer American history. Overall, the book does an excellent job investigating a 
forgotten genealogy of Indian religion in American while pointing towards new directions
in religious history. 
Neil Meyer LaGuardia Community College, City University of New York
EAST MEET BLACK: Asian and Black Masculinities in the Post-Civil Rights Era. By 
Chong Chon-Smith. Jackson: University of Mississippi Press. 2015.
Situating cultural texts in the post-civil rights era, East Meets Black reveals the ways 
in which African American and various Asian and Asian American identities have circled 
each other through “racial magnetism.” The concept captures the ways that race, nation 
and citizenship simultaneously push and pull against one another “as a system of social 
meanings in symmetrical contrast to each other” (3). Focusing primarily on manifestations
of radical black masculinity informed by the social and political developments in the 
1960s, the book examines Asian and black masculinities in literature, sports and music. 
Chon-Smith	significantly	contributes	to	Afro-Asian	scholarship	by	delineating	the	
significance	of	the	post-civil	rights	moment.	The	book	revives	the	obscured	relationship	
between blacks and Asians through the links between Patrick Moynihan, who promoted 
the notion of pathology emerging from black families in the 1960s, and William Peterson, 
who promoted the “model minority” stereotype for Asian Americans. It also shows the 
hidden	influences	of	transnational	capital	in	the	domestic	formations	of	dynamics	between	
blacks and Asians. These dynamics impact how perceptions of Asian bodies continue to 
be	filtered	through	the	lens	of	black	masculinity.	Afro-Asian	dynamics	deploy	differently	
depending on context. The dynamics among African American and Asian American writers 
works	out	differently	than	the	representations	of	Afro-Asian	buddies	in	Hollywood	film.	
The book also teases out the factors in play in the Shaquille O’Neal-Yao Ming scandal, 
deftly handling the competing interests of race and citizenship against the backdrop of 
basketball.	Here,	the	conflagration	occurs	within	the	context	of	national	concerns	about	
the	international	aspirations	of	the	National	Basketball	Association	as	well	as	the	influence	
of an American media not well-versed in the history of Asian Americans and stereotypical 
representations of them. 
At times, the book focuses more on the impact of black masculinity on various modes 
of Asian masculinity rather than on the reciprocal interchange suggested the historical 
context of the post-civil rights movement. Chon-Smith explores the impact of African 
American masculinity on the way that Asian American literary editors situated their publishing
project. At other times, the focus on Afro-Asian dynamics overshadows the analysis 
of masculinity. The examination of Ichiro Suzuki attempts to place him within a baseball 
 Book Reviews 135
tradition informed by the exclusion of African American players and highlighted by Jackie 
Robinson’s entry into the major leagues. However, the book focuses more on his entry 
into American baseball, a sport that features far fewer black players. The analysis of the 
ways in which both Asian American spoken word and hip-hop artists transliterate hip-hop 
aesthetics and structures into an Asian American experience overshadows the attention 
on	masculinity.	The	interrogation	of	the	buddy	film	attempts	to	define	a	female	buddy	in	
Romeo Must Die in a parallel with Rush Hour, but could explore the dynamics of gender 
within the context of romance. Nevertheless, Chon-Smith’s interrogation of Asian American
masculinities is a welcome addition to scholarship on Afro-Asian cultural interaction.
Crystal S. Anderson Longwood University
