New York Vertical: 
Reflections on the Modern Skyline 
Christoph Lindner 
New York... is a city of geometric heights, a petrified desert 
of grids and lattices, an inferno of greenish abstraction under 
a flat sky, a real Metropolis from which man is absent by his 
very accumulation. 
—Roland Barthes1 
And [New York] is the most beautiful city in the world? It is 
not far from it. No urban nights are like the nights there. I have 
looked down across the city from high windows. It is then that 
the great buildings lose reality and take on their magical powers. 
They are immaterial; that is to say one sees but the lighted 
windows. Squares after squares of flame, set and cut into the 
ether. Here is our poetry, for we have pulled down the stars to 
our will. 
—Ezra Pound, Patria Mia2 
I 
This essay is about the modern skyline of New York. To bring the subject 
into focus, I would like to start by commenting briefly on Horst Hamann's recent 
0026-3079/2006/4701-031 $2.50/0 American Studies, 47:1 (Spring 2006): 31-52 
31 
 32 Christoph Lindner 
book of photography from which I have borrowed the title New York Vertical? 
Reminiscent in many ways of Berenice Abbot's urban photography of the 
1930s—and in particular of her WPA project Changing New York4—Hamann's 
black and white city images stress not only the vertical components of New 
York's modern architecture, but also the interconnected geometry of those forms 
(Figure 1). The result is a collection of photographs that construct and define 
the city almost exclusively in terms of its verticality. Such a vision of New York 
is of course nothing new; and this is precisely what interests me about Hamann's 
photography. His work does more than reinforce a century-old image of New 
York as a city of extreme verticals. It also underlines in creative and often 
surprising ways the extent to which those verticals continue even today to 
dominate the cultural imagination of urban space. In this sense, Hamann's images 
highlight an important feature of the New York skyline. Its hypermediated 
silhouette contains what has become the most graphic and emblematic expression 
of the vertical city. 
Pursuing this idea, I want to consider the ways in which the modern skyline 
has been represented and imagined at several key junctures in its vertical history. 
But first I should clarify that by "modern" here I specifically mean the skyline 
produced during the modernist moment in art and urbanism which so profoundly 
shaped aesthetic sensibilities from the late 1890s through the first few decades 
of the twentieth century. This, however, is not to disregard the much broader 
historical span, reaching back to the city's early-modern colonial roots as well 
as ahead towards its globalization, that can also be encompassed by the idea of 
a "modern" skyline. In fact, although the central focus of this essay is the historical 
period loosely corresponding to the relatively short-lived moment of modernism, 
my discussion also seeks to place the modern skyline in the broader context of 
New York's urban development from colonial settlement to contemporary global 
city. It is for this reason that my discussion goes on to comment not only on the 
World Trade Center and the post-9/11 landscape but also on the pre-history of 
the vertical city. 
New York's cityscape has, of course, been the subject of a great deal of 
scholarly interest, particularly in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of 
September 11, 2001. For instance, in his recent study of New York 
metropolitanism, The Unfinished City, urban historian Thomas Bender devotes 
considerable attention to the symbiotic relationship between skyscraper and 
skyline, reasserting the long-standing argument that Manhattan's modern 
cityscape registers the near-total domination of the architecture of corporate 
capitalism over public space and culture.5 Similar scrutiny of the cityscape has 
also preoccupied a number of other, more mainstream studies of New York, 
including James Sander's lavishly illustrated Celluloid Skyline: New York and 
the Movies and Jan Seidler Ramirez's wide-ranging Painting the Town: 
Cityscapes of New York.6 Most recently, Douglas Tallack's far-reaching New 
York Sights: Visualizing Old and New New York shows the full extent to which 
visual culture—ranging from high art to ephemera—turned to the panoptic 
 New York Vertical 33 
f^X5Figure
1: HorstHamann, 'Steel Triangle, Rockefeller Center', 1998. (Courtesy 
of Horst Hamann) 
 34 Christoph Lindner 
perspective of the cityscape view to register the seismic urban changes shaking 
Manhattan during the transitional years of the early 1900s.7 One feature shared 
by these books is an emphasis on the visual iconography of New York's 
modernity. Such an emphasis is arguably deserved, however, not least because 
of the continuing interpretive challenges posed by the modern city's visual 
heterogeneity. 
While still engaging with issues of visuality, this essay broadens its scope 
beyond "the visual" to stress in addition the importance of "the textual" to the 
critique of cityscape. Specifically, my argument in this essay is that the modern 
skyline of New York figures across a full range of literary and cultural production 
as a highly unstable text to read and interpret, and that this site of instability and 
change is further distinguished by visions in which the city remains caught 
ambivalently between the sublime and the uncanny. To develop this line of 
thought, my discussion opens by revisiting a familiar view of the vertical city by 
Michel de Certeau in The Practice of Everyday Life, before considering a 
somewhat controversial commentary on the New York Skyline by Jean 
Baudrillard in his "Requiem for the Twin Towers." The related argument here is 
that, far from being unique to postmodernity, the contemporary city musings of 
Baudrillard and de Certeau belong to a long line of cultural critique extending 
back to the much earlier shoreline meditations of writers like Henry Adams, 
Abraham Cahan, Theodore Dreiser, Henry James, and James Weldon Johnson. 
II 
In The Practice of Everyday Life, Michel de Certeau begins his essay 
"Walking in the City" by reflecting on the experience of visiting the observation 
deck at the World Trade Center in the late 1970s. For de Certeau, the vertical 
journey to the top of a soaring skyscraper is one of liberation from the chaos 
and confinement of the city street: 
To be lifted to the summit of the World Trade Center is to be 
lifted out of the city's grasp. One's body is no longer clasped 
by the streets that turn and return it according to an anonymous 
law; nor is it possessed... by the rumble of so many differences 
and by the nervousness of New York traffic. When one goes up 
there, he leaves behind the mass that carries off and mixes up 
in itself any identity of authors and spectators.8 
Significantly, this euphoria of release from the city street is linked in de Certeau's 
thinking to the erotic pleasure of voyeurism—the pleasure, that is, of "seeing 
the whole."9 For what the observation deck provides through its sheer elevation 
is not only distance from the city but also a new visual perspective from which 
the urban expanse below appears as a whole, graspable image, a viewpoint 
impossible to achieve at the muddled and meandering level of the street. 
 New York Vertical 35 
Seen from above, the city is thus laid bare—revealed and exposed—to the 
prying curiosity of the urban gaze. The visitor is "transfigured into a voyeur."10 
And it is precisely in the guise of the voyeur that de Certeau, skimming and 
scanning the undulating surfaces of the city, describes his aerial view of 
Manhattan: 
Seeing Manhattan from the 110th floor of the World Trade 
Center. Beneath the haze stirred up by the winds, the urban 
island, a sea in the middle of the sea, lifts up the skyscrapers 
over Wall Street, sinks down at Greenwich, then rises again to 
the crests of Midtown, quietly passing over Central Park and 
finally undulates off into the distance of Harlem. A wave of 
verticals. Its agitation is momentarily arrested by vision. The 
gigantic mass is immobilized before the eyes. It is transformed 
into a texturology in which extremes coincide—extremes of 
ambition and degradation, brutal oppositions of races and styles, 
contrasts between yesterday's buildings, already transformed 
into trash cans, and today's urban irruptions that block out its 
space A city composed of paroxysmal places in monumental 
reliefs. The spectator can read in it a universe that is constantly 
exploding. . . . On this stage of concrete, steel and glass, cut 
out between two oceans (the Atlantic and the American) by a 
frigid body of water, the tallest letters in the world compose a 
gigantic rhetoric of excess in both expenditure and production.11 
De Certeau's urban panorama is marked by several distinctive features. Not 
least among these is the perception of the rigid geometry of New York's highrise 
architecture in terms of motion and fluidity. Manhattan's two principal clusters 
of skyscrapers—the vertical constellations of the downtown and midtown 
business districts—appear as "waves of verticals" surging up between the troughs 
of Greenwich Village, Central Park, and Harlem. Another distinctive feature of 
this aerial view is that the sense of motion is simultaneously countered by an 
effect of immobilization. New York's "gigantic mass" is "momentarily arrested 
by vision," stressing the city's contrasts and extremes. Equally striking are the 
images of violent energy. Everywhere, the city is convulsed by spasms, agitations, 
paroxysms, eruptions, and explosions. But perhaps the most distinctive feature 
of de Certeau's urban panorama is the transformation of the skyline into a text 
to be read. Most notably, the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center become 
"the tallest letters in the world," spelling out a message of capitalist excess that 
is engraved throughout and across the skyline. 
Today, it is no longer possible to see and experience New York from exactly 
the same perspective as Michel de Certeau in The Practice of Everyday Life. 
The terrorist attacks of September 11 that destroyed the Twin Towers of the 
 36 Christoph Lindner 
World Trade Center also destroyed this unique vantage point. And while the 
loss of this vantage point is meaningless when compared to the very real human 
tragedies of 9/11, it has nonetheless had a profound impact on the way people 
now look at and relate to the city. 
One small example of this impact occurred in Brooklyn Heights just across 
the river from Manhattan. On the water-front promenade that faces out towards 
the prow of Lower Manhattan, local residents in the immediate wake of 
September 11 attached photographs of the skyline to the iron railing in an attempt 
to guide visitors in their observation of the city. The photographs all featured 
silhouettes of Manhattan that still included the distinctive profile of the Twin 
Towers, showing the location and appearance of the absent skyscrapers. The 
assumption—and indeed the reality—was that many visitors and residents came 
to the promenade precisely in order to see the alteration to the skyline. In a way, 
they came to experience an absence, to gaze upon an urban view that no longer 
existed. And in this abstract sense the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center 
have not entirely disappeared from the New York skyline. Rather, haunting the 
contemporary imagination, the two skyscrapers continue even now to exert a 
spectral presence over the city. 
That people were drawn to vantage points in the wake of the terrorist attacks 
precisely because of what could no longer be seen in the urban panorama 
comments forcefully on the symbolic significance of both the Twin Towers 
themselves and the skyline to which they belonged. In his short contemplative 
essay, "Requiem for the Twin Towers," Jean Baudrillard discusses exactly this 
subject while attempting to disentangle the Twin Towers in historical and 
architectural terms from the rest of New York's skyscrapers. Despite making 
some outrageously vague statements and over-simplifying some highly complex 
issues, Baudrillard does offer some critical insight: 
All Manhattan's tall buildings had been content to confront 
each other in a competitive verticality, and the product of 
this was an architectural panorama reflecting the capitalist 
system itself—a pyramidal jungle, whose famous image 
stretched out before you as you arrived from the sea. That 
image changed after 1973, with the building of the World 
Trade Center. . . . Perfect parallelipeds, standing over 1,300 
feet tall, on a square base. Perfectly balanced, blind 
communicating vessels. . . . The fact that there were two of 
them signifies the end of any original reference. If there had 
been only one, monopoly would not have been perfectly 
embodied. Only the doubling of the sign truly puts an end to 
what it designates.... However tall they may have been, the 
two towers signified, none the less, a halt to verticality. They 
were not the same breed as the other buildings. They 
culminated in the exact reflection of each other.12 
 New York Vertical 37 
Like de Certeau some twenty years before him, Baudrillard similarly sees the 
contours of New York's modern architecture in terms of energy and chaos. In 
addition, he also stresses the legibility of the city when seen from a distance, 
reading into its verticality an expression of the capitalist spirit of competition. 
The difference is that Baudrillard locates a schism in the skyline—one that de 
Certeau, standing on top of the source of that rupture, seems to overlook. 
Baudrillard's thinking is that, in architectural terms at least, the Twin Towers 
mark a departure from the city's "competitive verticality" precisely because of 
their structural solipsism. As perfect mirror images of each other, the two towers 
constitute their own self-referential system, no longer competing for height and 
visibility with the other buildings around them but instead endlessly reflecting 
their own identical images back at each other. De Certeau calls the Twin Towers 
"the tallest letters in the world" and Baudrillard, picking up on the same idea, 
refers to them as "signs." For Baudrillard, however, those signs designate a 
slightly different moment in the cultural history of capitalism than New York's 
other, older skyscrapers. In their semiotic and architectural "reduplication,"13 
the Twin Towers represent powerful and highly visible symbols of the latecapitalist
age of globalization. As Mark Wigley similarly suggests in After the 
World Trade Center, "the key symbolic role of the World Trade Center . . . was 
to represent the global marketplace. In a strange way, supersolid, supervisible, 
superlocated buildings stood as a figure for the dematerialized, invisible, 
placeless market."14 Baudrillard concludes that this symbolism is the reason the 
Twin Towers were destroyed: "the violence of globalization also involves 
architecture, and hence the violent protest against it also involves the destruction 
of that architecture."15 
In the case of the World Trade Center, however, the link between architecture 
and violence is far more complicated than Baudrillard's comments would suggest. 
Given the global impact of the events of September 11, it is important to 
remember and acknowledge that the attacks on the Twin Towers were brought 
about by a highly complex set of political, historical, and cultural factors— 
factors that included but also exceeded the symbolic dimensions of the Twin 
Towers. But whether or not we agree with Baudrillard's reading of the Twin 
Towers, and in particular with his idea that the skyscrapers were somehow 
separate and distinct from all others in New York, his reflections touch on one 
of the city's most striking and enduring features. Manhattan has one of the most 
visually compelling and symbolically charged skylines in the world today. 
In their philosophical musings on Manhattan, Jean Baudrillard and Michel 
de Certeau respond in broadly similar ways to the sprawl and spectacle of the 
urban panorama by presenting the skyline as a text to be read. In the process, I 
would argue, they both see the skyline as sublime—in the Burkean sense of an 
aesthetic marvel that awes and overwhelms. I would also argue that they both 
depict the skyline as uncanny—in the Freudian sense of an unnerving encounter 
with the familiar rendered strange and alien. And finally, I would suggest that, 
 38 Christoph Lindner 
through various metaphors of motion, they both identify the skyline as a site of 
instability and change that invites yet resists interpretation. 
Far from being exclusive to our present global metropolitan age, however, 
such perspectives on New York have in fact dominated the cultural representation 
of the city's skyline from its first great moment of verticality onwards. 
Specifically, as I discuss next, the cultural history of the skyline in the late 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries is similarly marked not only by 
expressions of ambivalence but also by an emerging consciousness of the 
discursive dimensions of urban space. The result is graphic and enduring visions 
of the city as a sprawling urban text that mesmerizes and inspires yet also agitates 
and disturbs. In short, my argument is that, since the rise of the modern skyscraper, 
Manhattan has always been caught somewhere between the sublime and the 
uncanny. 
Ill 
The ever-changing skyline of New York has preoccupied writers ever since 
the city's low-rise beginnings as a Dutch trading post in the early seventeenth 
century. Even before that, the first European explorer to venture into New York 
Bay was moved to describe the scene in writing. In 1524 the Florentine navigator 
Giovanni da Verrazano chanced upon a "beautiful harbour" containing an "island 
of triangular form" during an expedition along the North American coast.16 His 
account of the voyage in a letter to the King of France contains the earliest 
recorded description in Western culture of the geographic location that eventually 
becomes home to the five-borough sprawl of New York City: 
After proceeding one hundred leagues, we found a very 
pleasant situation among some steep hills, through which a 
very large river, deep at its mouth, forced its way to the 
sea. . . . But as we were riding at anchor in a good berth, we 
would not venture up in our vessel, without a knowledge of 
the mouth; therefore we took the boat, and entering the river, 
we found the country on its banks well peopled, the inhabitants 
not differing much from the others, being dressed out with 
the feathers of birds of various colours.... All of a sudden, as 
is wont to happen to navigators, a violent contrary wind blew 
in from the sea, and forced us to return to our ship, greatly 
regretting to leave this region which seemed so commodious 
and delightful, and which we supposed must also contain great 
riches.17 
Despite the conspicuous absence of the city, this early skyline still has a powerful 
effect on the imagination of the observer. In this respect Verrazano's account 
shows how the draw of the New York skyline not only predates the city itself, 
 New York Vertical 39 
but also grows out of a much earlier encounter with the natural landscape. Indeed, 
it is this landscape—and in particular the unusual topography and wealth of 
natural resources noted by Verrazano—that underlies and enables the European 
colonization of the region and, through this process, the eventual growth of the 
city. It is also interesting to note that, in this first ever written description of 
New York Bay, Verrazano observes the land from the exact perspective that 
comes to dominate its cultural representation in the centuries that follow. 
Specifically, in what becomes the prevalent city-view from the seventeenth 
century onwards, the site is seen from the harbor looking northwards towards 
the prow of Lower Manhattan (Figure 2). 
By the nineteenth century, as the transition from landscape to cityscape 
accelerates and New York begins to acquire its modern urban character and 
appearance, the skyline becomes a firmly established literary motif For example, 
in Domestic Manners of the Americans (1832), the sensational precursor to 
Charles Dickens' American Notes ( 1842), the English novelist and travel writer 
Frances Trollope begins her account of visiting New York with this panoramic 
view of the city: 
. . . my imagination is incapable of conceiving any thing of 
the kind more beautiful than the harbour of New York. Various 
and lovely are the objects which meet the eye on every side, 
but the naming of them would only be to give a list of words, 
without conveying the faintest idea of the scene. I doubt if 
ever the pencil of Turner could do it justice, bright and glorious 
as it rose upon us. We seemed to enter the harbour of New 
Figure 2: Early skyline of Lower Manhattan: bird's-eye view of New Amsterdam, 
1635. (Courtesy of the Picture Collection, The Branch Libraries, The New York 
Public Library, Astor, Lenox and Tilden Foundations) 
 40 Christoph Lindner 
York upon waves of liquid gold, and as we darted past the 
green isles which rise from its bosom, like guardian sentinels 
of the fair city, the setting sun stretched his horizontal beams 
farther and farther at each moment, as if to point to us some 
new glory in the landscape.18 
Like Verrazano some three hundred years earlier, Trollope is powerfully moved 
by the beauty of the harbor view. But although that view now contains one of 
the world's largest and most densely developed cities, the urban is almost 
completely glossed over in the language of the passage by the heavy stress on 
nature. There is even a certain reluctance on Trollope's part to see and 
acknowledge the expanding presence of the city. Moreover, her refusal to name 
the urban sights combined with her explicit reference to J. M. W. Turner, the 
Romantic landscape artist, further underlines this point, effectively inviting the 
reader to imagine the unnatural city scape in terms of a natural landscape. Thus 
filtered through the eco-centric lens of pictorial Romanticism, Trollope's sensual 
vision of the skyline transfigures the blooming metropolis into an aesthetic 
wonder derived from and connected to the natural world that, in an ironic twist, 
New York's urban expansion was rapidly supplanting. 
While Frances Trollope clearly responds with exuberance to New York's 
nineteenth-century skyline, other writers of the period are far less enthusiastic 
and forgiving about the city's horizontal spread. Most notably, for the 
transcendentalist Henry David Thoreau, who spent six months living on Staten 
Island in 1843,19 the sight of Manhattan's confused jumble across the water 
presented a hideous and unwelcome sight. As he complains in a letter to Ralph 
Waldo Emerson: 
I don't like the city better, the more I see it, but worse. I am 
ashamed of my eyes that behold it. It is a thousand times 
meaner than I could have imagined. It will be something to 
hate,—that's the advantage it will be to me. . . . The pigs in 
the street are the most respectable part of the population. When 
will the world learn that a million men are of no importance 
compared to one man? But I must wait for a shower of 
shillings, or at least a slight dew or mizzling of sixpences, 
before I explore New York very far.20 
Such extreme expressions of disdain for the urban panorama are hardly surprising 
coming, as they do, from the future author of Walden (1854) in a letter to the 
outspoken author of Nature (1836). Yet it is revealing to learn that part of 
Thoreau's revulsion at the sight of Manhattan derives from a larger anxiety 
concerning the relation of the individual to the urban crowd. That anxiety, also 
explored by Edgar Allan Poe in his city story "The Man of the Crowd" (1840), 
 New York Vertical 41 
is one that Walter Benjamin specifically links to the social experience of 
modernity when he remarks on "the obliteration of the individual by the bigcity
crowd."21 For Thoreau, who seeks to reclaim the individual from the 
anonymity of the crowd, the skyline represents precisely that process of 
obliteration and therefore becomes "something to hate." And while we can only 
speculate about how far such urban experiences contributed towards Thoreau's 
decision to retreat to nature in 1845, it is fair to say that his visual confrontation 
with the New York skyline does at least prompt him to begin commenting, 
however cursorily, on the issues of individualism and self-knowledge that go on 
to preoccupy so much of his later writing. 
Furthermore, Thoreau's closing remark about needing more money to 
explore the city comments on more than just the expense of urban tourism. It 
also touches on one of his underlying reasons for visiting New York in the first 
place. As his letters from Staten Island reveal, Thoreau was driven by financial 
need to make frequent trips into Manhattan in search of a market for his planned 
writing. So although he is repelled by the city on one level, the budding writer 
is nonetheless drawn to it on another one entirely. And in this reluctant attraction 
to the object of his disgust, Thoreau experiences yet another distinct urban 
phenomenon observed by Walter Benjamin in his critique of modernity—namely, 
that in the era of high capitalism the writer needs the city. "The true situation of 
the man of letters," writes Benjamin, is that "he goes to the marketplace as a 
flâneur, supposedly to take a look at it, but in reality to find a buyer."22 Benjamin 
may be writing about Baudelaire and Paris, but the comment equally applies to 
Thoreau and New York. After all, in his exploratory excursions into the city, 
Thoreau assumes the double role of sightseer and commodity in the urban 
marketplace. 
In "Manhattan from the Bay," a short fragment from his experimental prose 
memoir Specimen Days (1882), Walt Whitman recalls a view of the city 
encountered while pleasure-sailing around New York Bay on a lazy summer 
day in 1878: 
And rising out of the midst [of sloops and schooner yachts], 
tall-topt, ship-hemm'd, modern, American, yet strangely 
oriental, V-shaped Manhattan, with its compact mass, its 
spires, its cloud-touching edifices group'd at the centre—the 
green of the trees, and all the white, brown and gray of 
architecture well blended, as I see it, under a miracle of limpid 
sky, delicious light of heaven above, and June haze on the 
surface below.23 
The emergence of this modern, skyrocketing, and strangely "othered" metropolis 
is what the transitional cityscapes of Trollope and Thoreau begin to register. 
For as Peter Brooker suggests, "the future of New York City could already be 
 42 Christoph Lindner 
seen" by the 1850s.24 And in glimpsing that future, writers like Trollope and 
Thoreau not only seem to anticipate the rise of the vertical city but also, in the 
process, prefigure the even more extreme urban visions of late nineteenth and 
early twentieth-century writers. Indeed, once New York turns vertical, the 
experience of wonder and estrangement already evident in the pre-vertical 
narratives of Trollope, Thoreau, and Whitman become significantly accentuated 
in literary and other artistic representations of the skyline. 
One such representation occurs in Henry James's early twentieth-century 
travelogue, The American Scene (1907). Returning home to the United States in 
1904 after some twenty years living in Europe, James finds that the low-rise 
New York of his childhood has been replaced with a "strange vertiginous" city.25 
As he seeks to come to terms with this radical transformation, James offers this 
piercing critique of the modern skyline: 
. . . the multitudinous sky-scrapers standing up to the view, 
from the water, like extravagant pins in a cushion already 
overplanted, and stuck in as in the dark, anywhere and anyhow, 
have at least the felicity of carrying out the fairness of tone, of 
taking the sun and the shade in the manner of towers of marble. 
. . . You see the pin-cushion profile, so to speak, on passing 
between Jersey City and Twenty-third Street, but you get it 
broadside on, this loose nosegay of architectural flowers, if 
you skirt the Battery, well out, and embrace the whole 
plantation Such growths, you feel, have confessedly arisen 
but to be 'picked,' in time, with a shears. . . .26 
Seen here from the perspective of the harbor, Manhattan figures first as an over­
stuffed pin-cushion and then as a disorderly bouquet of overgrown flowers waiting 
to be sliced apart by shears. In addition to the theme of excess, what links the 
two metaphors is the imagery of discomfort and incision: needle-points, sharp 
edges, and even the threat of decapitation. Moreover, this skyline also suffers 
from an absence of order. In James's terms, the constellation of skyscrapers 
conforms to no visible pattern, suggesting a perceived need for some degree of 
rationality and restraint to be imposed upon the city's upward growth. 
For Henry James, then, the effect of gazing at the skyline after returning 
home from his extended stay in Europe is to experience both wonder and unease: 
wonder at the vertical excess and extravagance; and unease at the unfamiliarity 
of this new and animated urban spectacle. Here, as in the much later narrations 
of Baudrillard and de Certeau, the result is a dual sense of excitement and 
estrangement. The difference, however, is that in James's text the uncanny 
ultimately comes to dominate much more forcefully over the sublime. One reason 
is that, as Morton and Lucia White argue in The Intellectual versus the City, 
James's response to the modern cityscape is colored by a Eurocentric nostalgia 
for pre-vertical New York.27 In a letter to Emerson from 1843 Thoreau mentions 
 New York Vertical 43 
Figure 3: New York skyscrapers from Jersey City, 1921. (Courtesy of the Library 
of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division) 
visiting Henry James's father at his home in Washington Square and reports that 
he "has naturalized and humanized New York for me."28 It is interesting, if not 
just a little ironic, that some sixty years later the son of the only person capable 
of making Thoreau feel at ease in New York cannot naturalize and humanize the 
new face of the city for himself. 
In his 1919 essay on the uncanny, Freud suggests that the unheimlich "is in 
reality nothing new or alien, but something which is familiar and old—established 
in the mind and which has become alienated."29 Building on Freud's formulation, 
the architectural historian Anthony Vidler suggests that this "propensity of the 
familiar to turn on its owners, suddenly to become defamiliarized,"30 is a 
phenomenon connected not only to the interior spaces of the psyche as per Freud, 
but also to the exterior spaces of the modern city as per Benjamin: "the uncanny, 
as Walter Benjamin noted, was also born out of the rise of the great cities, their 
disturbingly heterogeneous crowds and newly scaled spaces."31 Vidler calls this 
"condition of modern anxiety" the "architectural uncanny,"32 and defines it as 
an aesthetic mode of estrangement endemic to capitalist modernity and closely 
linked to the spatial formations and social experiences of the city. In such terms, 
Henry James's skyline in The American Scene can be understood as a 
manifestation of the architectural uncanny in the full sense that Vidler gives to 
the term. For what James ultimately reads into the text of the defamiliarized 
skyline is, quite literally, the unhomeliness of the modern city. The old and 
familiar is suddenly made new and strange. 
A similarly fraught narration of the New York skyline appears in Henry 
Adams' fictionalized autobiography, The Education of Henry Adams (1918). 
Paralleling James's homecoming in The American Scene, the passage in question 
features the experience of another wandering American returning to the city 
after a long absence. Interestingly, the year is also 1904 and the skyline is 
observed from the same location and perspective as Henry James's earlier text: 
 44 Christoph Lindner 
As he came up the bay again, November 5,1904,... he found 
the approach more striking than ever—wonderful—unlike 
anything man had ever seen—and like nothing he had ever 
much cared to see. The outline of the city became frantic in 
its effort to explain something that defied meaning. Power 
seemed to have outgrown its servitude and to have asserted 
its freedom. The cylinder had exploded and thrown great 
masses of stone and steam against the sky. The city had the air 
and movement of hysteria, and the citizens were crying, in 
every accent of danger and alarm, that the new forces must at 
any cost be brought under control.33 
As Adams describes it, the skyline comes uncannily alive in the imagination of 
the observer, creating powerful feelings of awe, hysteria, and confusion, and 
also generating uneasy visions of movement, violence, and eruption. Like Henry 
James, moreover, Adams similarly expresses both anxiety over the cityscape's 
visual disorder as well as a desire to exert control over the seemingly autonomous 
urban machine. 
More significantly, Adams goes slightly further than James to suggest in an 
explicit way that the defamiliarized skyline contains some kind of meaning. The 
problem, as he makes a point of stressing, is that the ever-shifting text of the 
new city resists interpretation: "the outline of the city became frantic in its effort 
to explain something that defied meaning."34 But although Adams fails on this 
occasion to decipher the meaning he senses in the urban landscape, he does 
demonstrate an emerging consciousness of the discursive dimensions of urban 
space—the "gigantic rhetoric of excess in both expenditure and production" 
that de Certeau much later comes to call the "immense texturology" of the city.35 
Together, the textual cityscapes of writers like Henry James and Henry 
Adams construct a vision of the New York skyline in which the soaring verticals 
of the city function primarily as symbols of corporate capital—and this 
symbolism is one source of their shared anxiety about the skyrocketing 
development of the city. However, in the imagination of many immigrant and 
ethnic American writers, the New York skyline also functions in a slightly 
different way as a powerful symbol of social opportunity, albeit a frequently 
conflicted one. 
For example, this other, more optimistic symbolism is stressed quite heavily 
in The Rise of David Levinsky, published in 1917 by Abraham Cahan, a 
Lithuanian-born Jewish writer, newspaper editor, and trade unionist who arrived 
in New York from Russia in 1882. In this fictional "rags to riches" autobiography 
about Jewish-American life in turn-of-the-century New York, Cahan pursues a 
concern that recurs throughout his creative and political writing. That concern 
is the transformative effect of the urban American experience on New York's 
immigrant population. In this respect, Cahan's perspective on the city differs 
 New York Vertical 45 
substantially from that of affluent, American-born writers like Henry James, 
whose nostalgic urban reflections often bemoan the passing of an exclusive and 
predominantly mono-cultural version of Old New York. As Shaun O'Connell 
notes in his literary history of New York, in contrast to James who "worried 
about the ways immigrants would change America," socially-conscious 
immigrant writers like Abraham Cahan "examined the ways America transformed 
the immigrant."36 This difference of perspective registers in Cahan's alternative 
version of the skyline, where the panoramic spectacle of New York, now filtered 
through the immigrant gaze, represents no longer an encoding of capital but 
instead a space of unbound possibility: 
The immigrant's arrival in his new home is like a second birth 
to him. Imagine a new-borne babe in possession of a fully 
developed intellect. Would it ever forget its entry into the 
world? Neither does the immigrant ever forget his entry into a 
country which is, for him, a new world in the profoundest 
sense of the term. . . . I conjure up the gorgeousness of the 
spectacle as it appeared to me on that clear June morning: the 
magnificent verdure of Staten Island, the tender blue of sea 
and sky, the dignified bustle of passing craft—above all, those 
floating, squatting, multitudinously windowed palaces which 
I subsequently learned to call ferries. It was all so utterly unlike 
anything I had ever seen or dreamed before. It unfolded itself 
like a divine revelation. I was in a trance or in something 
closely resembling one. . . . My transport of admiration, 
however, only added to my sense of helplessness and awe. 
Here on shipboard, I was sure of shelter and food, at least. 
How was I going to procure my sustenance on those magic 
shores? I wished the remaining hour could be prolonged 
indefinitely. . . . When I say that my first view of New York 
Bay struck me as something not of this earth it is not a mere 
figure of speech.37 
In Cahan's rhetoric of renewal, the immigrant's arrival in New York is depicted 
in terms of spiritual rebirth. The significance of the moment proves so over­
powering that the visual experience of the landscape leaves the observer in a 
trance-like state of ungrounded delirium akin to religious ecstasy. The result is 
the transformation of the scene—at least in the narrator's imagination—into a 
fantastical, other-worldly apparition. 
This sort of sublime, revelatory vision is characteristic of Cahan's long­
distance views of New York. In another arrival moment from one of his earliest 
immigrant stories, "The Imported Bridegroom" (1898), Cahan offers a similar 
scene of sublimity and enchantment: 
 46 Christoph Lindner 
Can there be anything more beautiful, more sublime, and more 
uplifting than the view, on a clear summer morning, of New 
York harbor from an approaching ship? Shaya saw in the 
enchanting effect of sea, verdure, and sky a new version of 
his vision of paradise. . . . Yet, overborne with its looming 
grandeur, his heart grew heavy with suspense.38 
As in The Rise of David Levinsky, the immigrant gaze once again sees the 
landscape of New York in terms of an earthly paradise. In both cases, the 
distortion leads to a mental projection that sets impossibly high expectations 
for the immigrant's new life in America. This contrast between reverie and reality 
is of course the point of these quasi-supernatural skylines, both of which are 
also accompanied by a sense of foreboding and anxiety. Using the innocent, 
unknowing perspective of the arriving immigrant, Cahan deliberately sets up an 
ideal image waiting to be undermined by the experience of the city. 
In The Rise of David Levins ky, this process of disillusionment begins almost 
immediately as the narrator disembarks into the carcéral space of the "big 
Immigration Station,"39 and continues in the city itself where, standing lost 
beneath the "hurtling and panting" elevated railway, "the active life of the great 
strange city" causes him to "feel like one abandoned in the midst of a jungle."40 
"The Imported Bridegroom" follows a similar pattern of estrangement and 
disorientation. Upon arrival in the city, Shaya, the titular object of "importation," 
is taken directly to a fine clothing store on Broadway where, in an attempt to 
make him look "Americanized," his importer decks him out in the trendiest 
"garb of Gentile civilization" and parades him along the street.41 The humiliating 
experience leaves him feeling "tied and fettered" and deeply unsure of his new 
identity. It also contributes to his growing sense of objectification. 
Despite these critiques of the urban experience, Cahan's New York 
panoramas do not in themselves offer the sort of explicit treatment of the built 
environment of the city dominating the textual cityscapes of most other writers 
of the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries. Skyscrapers, for instance, 
remain conspicuously absent, though almost everything else surrounding the 
vertical city, from the natural landscape to the maritime traffic, makes an 
appearance. The same also holds true in Yekl (1896), Cahan's earliest novel 
about immigrant New York, suggesting that the conspicuous absence of the city's 
most visible vertical elements is related to the nature of Cahan's interest in the 
skyline. In order to show the misplaced optimism of the immigrant gaze at the 
precise moment of arrival in the city, as well as to establish an ideal image of the 
city, Cahan presents a blinkered long-distance view in which the architectural 
uncanny of the modern metropolis is completely glossed over. To compensate 
for this oversight, however, Cahan does make a point of juxtaposing his sublime 
long-distance views with uncanny urban close-ups. 
The paradox of New York's double significance as a symbol of liberation 
and estrangement is perhaps most graphically illustrated by the Harlem 
 New York Vertical 47 
Renaissance writer James Weldon Johnson, in whose work the skyline's power 
to enchant acquires a far more sinister overtone. In his innovative novel about 
the double consciousness of black life in America, The Autobiography of an 
Ex-Coloured Man (1912), Johnson offers a narrative of arrival in the vertical 
city that both identifies and problematizes the skyline's function as a symbol of 
opportunity. One of Johnson's central concerns in The Autobiography is "the 
dread power of the city"42 and the way large urban centers such as New York 
exploit the imagination of inexperienced newcomers. It is precisely this concern 
that underscores Johnson's description of the narrator's first encounter with 
New York. The event relates the modern African-American experience not of 
immigration but of migration—in this case from the agricultural South to the 
industrial North: 
We steamed up into New York Harbour late one afternoon in 
spring. The last efforts of the sun were being put forth in turning 
the waters of the bay to glistening gold; the green islands on 
either side, in spite of their warlike mountings, looked calm 
and peaceful; the buildings of the town shone out in reflected 
light which gave the city an air of enchantment; and, truly, it 
is an enchanted spot. New York City is the most fatally 
fascinating thing in America. She sits like a great witch at the 
gate of the country, showing her alluring white face and hiding 
her crooked hands and feet under the folds of her wide 
garments—constantly enticing thousands from far within, and 
tempting those who come from across the seas to go no farther. 
And all these become the victims of her caprice. Some she at 
once crushes beneath her cruel feet; others she condemns to a 
fate like that of galley-slaves; a few she favours and fondles, 
riding them high on bubbles of fortune; then with a sudden 
breath she blows the bubble out and laughs mockingly as she 
watches them fall.43 
Here, as in the urban vistas of James, Adams, and Cahan, the New York skyline 
continues to figure as an exhilarating spectacle of the sublime and the uncanny. 
A slight difference, however, is that Johnson places more emphasis on the play 
and significance of color. Reminiscent of Frances Trollope's description of lowrise
New York in terms of Romantic landscape painting, Johnson's penumbral 
urban panorama is framed by "green" scenery and bathed in "glistening gold" 
light. Rising from the center of this gilded composition is the "white-faced" 
city, ominously perceived by the narrator as a cruel Sphinx-like enchantress 
guarding the entrance to a world of wealth and opportunity. 
The trope of New York as "gateway" to America has been a recurring 
metaphor for the city ever since its colonial beginnings. In Johnson's version, 
 48 Christoph Lindner 
however, the symbolically charged interplay between black observer and white 
metropolis subtly reshapes that familiar metaphor in terms of racial and ethnic 
difference. The clear message is that this white gate-keeper does not grant equal 
access to all, and certainly not to African-American migrants like Johnson's 
narrator. In this sense, the skyline functions as a false icon of opportunity. It 
seduces the unsuspecting victim into a life of economic hardship and social 
inequality—into the very condition of urban alienation that Johnson goes on to 
write about so powerfully m Black Manhattan (1930), his counter-cultural history 
of "the black metropolis within the heart of the great Western white metropolis."44 
Johnson's representation of the New York skyline as both gateway and dead 
end reveals what Maria Balshaw describes in Looking for Harlem as "the 
paradoxical attitude to the city one finds structuring African American urban 
literature throughout the twentieth century."45 Like many other writers of the 
Harlem Renaissance, Johnson presents a double image of the modern metropolis 
that, in Balshaw's terms, not only contains a "passionate urbanism" in which 
"the city stands for the future, and in particular the future of the race" but also 
"paints the city as the site of deprivation, squalor and discontent."46 The result 
is "the paradox of the city of heaven that is also the city of hell."47 For Johnson, 
that urban paradox—so dramatically enunciated by the modern skyline—is what 
makes New York "the most fatally fascinating thing in America."48 It is a source 
of the city's aura of enchantment yet also a cause of its everyday horror. 
The skyline's illusory and dream-like qualities are similarly a recurring 
concern for the naturalist writer Theodore Dreiser. In his 1926 collection of 
New York sketches, The Color of a Great City, Dreiser opens the volume with 
this urban dreamscape: 
It was silent, the city of my dreams, marble and serene, due 
perhaps to the fact that in reality I knew nothing of crowds, 
poverty, the winds and storms of the inadequate that blow 
like a dust along the paths of life. It was an amazing city, so 
far-flung, so beautiful, so dead. There were tracks of iron 
stalking through the air, and streets that were as canons, and 
stairways that mounted in vast flights to noble plazas, and 
steps that led down into deep places where were, strangely 
enough, underworld silences And then, after twenty years, 
here it stood, as amazing almost as my dream, save that in the 
waking the flush of life was over it. It possessed the tang of 
contests and dreams and enthusiasms and delights and terrors 
and despairs.49 
Blurring the distinctions between the imaginary and the real, Dreiser depicts the 
city even more emphatically than Abraham Cahan and James Weldon Johnson 
as an illusory space of contradictions and extremes. Reminiscent in many ways 
 New York Vertical 49 
of Fritz Lang's cinematic vision of the two-tiered city in Metropolis (1927), 
Dreiser's New York is polarized between majestic, vertiginous heights and 
gloomy, underworld depths. More disturbingly, the city is described as being 
both "dead" and "alive" at the same time, as if suspended in an indeterminate 
and uncanny state of undeath. The overall effect is to project a deeply conflicted 
image of vertical New York as enticing, beautiful, and familiar yet also 
frightening, strange, and unhomely. 
It is significant, moreover, that Dreiser presents New York specifically in 
terms of a waking dream. Not only does this situate the meditative experience 
of city-gazing on the threshold between the conscious and unconscious minds, 
but it also reinforces the importance of image and illusion to the construction of 
the city's modern urban identity. In short, Dreiser's urban dreamscape reminds 
us that the vertical city is not just a physical place; it is also a state of mind. 
Dreiser further develops this idea in "The Rivers of the Nameless Dead," a 
later sketch from The Color of a Great City in which he sees the skyline of 
Manhattan as a potentially deceptive image capable of luring the unsuspecting 
viewer into a false sense of the city: 
There is an island surrounded by rivers, and about it the tide 
scurries fast and deep. It is a beautiful island, long, narrow, 
magnificently populated, and with such a wealth of life and 
interest as no island in the world before has ever 
possessed. . . . Enormous buildings and many splendid 
mansions line its streets If you were to . . . see the picture 
it presents to the coming eye, you would assume that it was 
all that it seemed A world of comfort and satisfaction for 
all who take up their abode within it—an island of beauty and 
delight. The sad part of it is, however, that the island and its 
beauty are, to a certain extent, a snare. Its seeming loveliness, 
which promises so much to the innocent eye, is not always 
easy of realization.50 
Like Abraham Cahan and James Weldon Johnson, Dreiser makes a point of 
emphasizing the importance of distinguishing between the harsh, everyday 
realities of urban life and the glossy, idealized image of the city projected by the 
skyline. In Dreiser's terms, problems arise when the "innocent eye" fails to 
make that distinction and, as a consequence, inaccurately reads into the distant 
silhouette of the "beautiful island" a false promise of wealth and opportunity. 
The implication is that gazing at the modern cityscape requires certain interpretive 
skills in order to see beneath or beyond the surface. Without these, the viewer is 
liable to be seduced by the superficial "beauty" and "delight" of the spectacle. 
While Dreiser may be overstating the skyline's power to exert control over 
the imagination of the casual observer, he does make a significant point 
 50 Christoph Lindner 
Figure 4: Midtown Manhattan skyline, looking South, 1931. (Courtesy of the 
Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division) 
concerning the cityscape itself. It is the same point that has underscored not 
only my own argument in this essay but also, as we have seen, the urban narratives 
of writers such as James, Adams, Cahan, and Johnson, and even the critical 
reflections of thinkers like Baudrillard and de Certeau. Namely, Dreiser suggests 
that to gaze upon the cityscape of vertical New York is to confront one of capitalist 
modernity's most emblematic and volatile urban texts. 
IV 
In The Skyscraper in American Art, 1890-1931, Merrill Schleier argues 
that, despite the exuberant urban optimism of artists like Charles Sheeler and 
Hugh Ferriss, New York's visual imagination most often responds to the rise of 
the vertical city in "ambivalent terms."51 Surveying a diverse body of literature, 
this essay finds that New York's textual imagination is similarly dominated by a 
profound ambivalence towards the city's first great moment of verticality. For 
many early twentieth-century writers, the most discernable place where this 
ambivalence registers is in the tension between the sublime and the uncanny 
underpinning their narrative treatments of the modern skyline. For Henry James 
and Henry Adams, who see Manhattan in terms of congestion and deformity, 
this tension arises out of an anxiety over the rapid pace of capitalist urbanization 
and, in particular, the consequent explosion of unfamiliar urban sights. For 
Abraham Cahan and James Weldon Johnson, who identify New York as a 
 New York Vertical 51 
problematic icon of opportunity, the tension is created by the skyline's power to 
enchant and mislead the immigrant/migrant gaze. And finally, for Theodore 
Dreiser, whose imaginative city sketches take the dreaminess of the skyline to 
conceptual extremes, the tension derives from the gap between the elusive city 
of the imagination and the lived city of everyday life. 
In their shared ambivalence, these early reflections on the modern skyline 
reveal the extent to which New York's shape-shifting verticals have been a 
recurring cultural concern. Currently, as New York not only rebuilds but also 
reimagines its skyline in the settling wake of 9/11, this concern has acquired 
renewed significance. During this latest reshaping of the urban landscape, we 
need to remember that it is the fundamental nature of the New York skyline 
never to be complete—always to remain in flux between the sublime and the 
uncanny. 
Notes 
This essay draws on research carried out while on a British Academy grant at the New 
York Historical Society and New York Public Library. I would like to thank the British 
Academy and the library staff at the NYHS and NYPL for their support. An early 
version of this essay was presented as a public lecture at Greenwich University's School 
of Architecture and Design in London, and I am indebted to Teresa Stoppani and the 
various commentators at this talk whose questions and responses helped me to think 
through some of the issues raised here. My thanks as well to Peter Brooker, Eric 
Sandeen, and Douglas Tallack for comments and conversations along the way, and to 
Horst Hamann for so generously making his original artwork available for this essay. 
1. Roland Barthes, The Eiffel Tower and Other Mythologies', trans. Richard Howard 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997), 149. 
2. Ezra Pound, Patria Mia (Chicago: Ralph Fletcher Seymour, 1950), 32-3. 
3. Horst Hamann, New York Vertical (New York: te Neus, 2001). 
4. Bonnie Yochelson, Berenice Abbott: Changing New York (New York: The New Press, 
1997). 
5. Thomas Bender, The Unfinished City: New York and the Metropolitan Idea (New York: 
The New Press, 2002), 53. 
6. James Sanders, Celluloid Skyline: New York and the Movies (London: Bloomsbury, 
2002); Jan Seidler Ramirez, éd., Painting the Town: Cityscapes of New York (New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 2000). 
7. Douglas Tallack, New York Sights: Visualizing Old and New New York (New York: 
Berg, 2005); also see Douglas Tallack, 'City Sights: Mapping and Representing New York City,' 
Urban Space and Representation, ed. Maria Balshaw and Liam Kennedy (London: Pluto, 2000), 
24-38. 
8. Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life, trans. Steven Rendell (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1988), 92. 
9. Ibid. 
\0.Ibid. 
11. Ibid., 91. 
12. Jean Baudrillard, "Requiem for the Twin Towers," The Spirit of Terrorism, trans. Chris 
Turner (London: Verso, 2002), 42-4. 
13. Ibid., 43. 
14. Mark Wigley, "Insecurity by Design," After the World Trade Center: Rethinking New 
York City, eds. Michael Sorkin and Sharon Zukin (New York: Routledge, 2002), 74. 
15. Baudrillard, "Requiem," 45. 
16. Giovanni Verrazano, The Voyage of John De Verrazano, Along the Coast of North 
America, from Carolina to Newfoundland, A.D. J525, trans. Joseph G. Cogswell (New York: The 
New-York Historical Society), 45, 46. 
17. Ibid. 
18. Frances Trollope, Domestic Manners of the Americans (London: Penguin, 1997), 260. 
 52 Christoph Lindner 
19. See John Aldrich Christie, Thoreau as World Traveler (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1965), 8-19. 
20. Henry David Thoreau, The Correspondence of Henry David Thoreau, eds. Walter 
Harding and Carl Bode (New York: New York University Press, 1958), 110-11. 
21. Walter Benjamin, Charles Baudelaire: A Lyric Poet in the Era of High Capitalism, 
trans. Harry Zohn (London: Verso, 1997), 43. 
22. Ibid., 34. 
23. Walt Whitman, 'Manhattan from the Bay', in Walt Whitman: Complete Poetry and 
Collected Prose (New York: Library of America, 1982), 823. 
24. Peter Brooker, New York Fictions: Modernity, Postmodernism, The New Modern (New 
York: Longman, 1996), 29. 
25. Henry James, The American Scene (New York: Penguin, 1994), 61. 
26. Ibid., 60. 
27. Morton White and Lucia White, The Intellectual versus the City: From Thomas Jefferson 
to Frank Lloyd Wright (Cambridge: Harvard University Press and MIT Press, 1962), 75. 
28. Thoreau, Correspondence, 110. 
29. Sigmund Freud, 'The Uncanny', The Penguin Freud Library, ed. and trans. James 
Strachey (London: Penguin, 1985), vol. 14, 363-4. 
30. Anthony Vidler, The Architectural Uncanny: Essays in the Modern Unhomely 
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1999), 6. 
31. Ibid., A. 
32. Ibid., 6-7. 
33. Henry Adams, The Education of Henry Adams (London: Penguin, 1995), 471. 
34. Ibid. 
35. De Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life, 91, 92. 
36. Shaun O'Connell, Remarkable, Unspeakable New York: A Literary History (Boston: 
Beacon, 1995), 98. 
37. Abraham Cahan, The Rise of David Levinsky (New York: Penguin, 1993), 86-8. 
38. Abraham Cahan, "The Imported Bridegroom," in Yekl, and The Imported Bridegroom 
and Other Stories of Yiddish New York (New York: Dover, 1970), 119. 
39. Cahan, The Rise of David Levinsky, 89. 
40. Ibid., 90. 
41. Cahan, "The Imported Bridegroom," 120. 
42. James Weldon Johnson, The Autobiography of an Ex-Coloured Man (repr., New York: 
Vintage, 1989), 90. 
43. Ibid., 89. 
44. James Weldon Johnson, Black Manhattan (New York: Da Cappo Press, 1991), 4. 
45. Maria Balshaw, Looking For Harlem: Urban Aesthetics in African-American Literature 
(London: Pluto, 2000), 1. 
46. Ibid. 
47. Ibid., 2. 
48. Johnson, Autobiography, 89. 
49. Theodore Dreiser, The Color of a Great City (Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 
1996), 1. 
50. Ibid., 284-5. 
51. Merill Schleier, The Skyscraper in American Art, 1890-1931 (Ann Arbor: UMI Research 
Press, 1986), 1-2, 16-17. 
