7
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
Energy Ethics: Emerging Perspectives 
in a Time of Transition
Editorial
Giovanni Frigo
University of North Texas, Denton, TX - USA
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.7358/rela-2018-001-frig  giovanni.frigo@unt.edu
1. introduction
“E” is an algorithm, “energy” is a loaded word. “E” is 
meaningful only within a formula, “energy” is charged 
with hidden implications: it refers to a subtle something 
which has the ability to make nature do work. 
Ivan Illich, The Social Construction of Energy (2015)
This special issue grapples with the timely and exciting theme of “energy 
ethics”. It is a one of a kind publication bringing together 16 intellectuals 
from 10 different countries. It includes both young researchers and established
scholars working in disciplines as different as anthropology, sustain-
ability studies, public policy, theology and, of course, philosophy. Its cosmopolitan
orientation and the diversity of its contributions offer a wide range 
of positions together with innovative approaches to the study of energy. 
The goal of this collective project is threefold. First, it aims at exploring 
energy’s multifaceted cultural and philosophical dimensions with a specific 
attention to ethics. For this reason, authors were given significant freedom of 
inquiry and yet, they have been invited to develop their original work in line 
with the scope and orientation of the journal. Second, the overall collection 
shows that the humanities in general, and ethics specifically, can fruitfully 
contribute to the energy discourse, bringing analytical acumen and reflective 
depth concerning the moral and socio-cultural implications of energy. Third, 
despite the fact that such unpredictable engagements with the topic of energy 
may sometimes appear unusual or challenging, they are aimed at sparkling 
further dialog across disciplines, enriching the debate about current energy 
transitions from fossil fuels to clean, renewable and sustainable sources.
 Giovanni Frigo
8
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
Following the usual format of Relations. Beyond Anthropocentrism, this 
special issue is also published in two separated volumes. The present issue, 
vol. 6.1, will be followed in November 2018 by vol. 6.2. Besides this introduction,
each edition contains five research papers, two comments, one 
interview and reviews. In the second issue, the “energy ethics” interview will 
feature philosopher of technology Carl Mitcham, one of the most influential 
contemporary thinkers on the topic of energy and ethics. The dialog with 
Mitcham – a tireless public intellectual internationally recognized for his 
efforts in bridging the gap between engineering and ethics – will help further
engage the reader with the theme of energy and ethics from its incep-
tion in the early 1970s to its recent developments in China and beyond. 
Since the present editorial serves both volumes, the second issue will 
not feature a separated introduction. Instead, vol. 6.2 will begin with a 
broad literature review of the most relevant antecedents in the study of 
energy and ethics. It will survey past and current scholarly literature in 
energy humanities, anthropology of energy and ethics of energy, including 
recent conferences and interdisciplinary projects. It will thus help the readers
better orient themselves in this new area of intellectual engagement and 
hopefully intrigue some to explore further.
In the attempt to present the overarching narrative of this project 
and introduce the inspiring work of the authors – my patient companions 
in this one-year-long intellectual journey – this introduction ponders on 
the exciting opportunity to think philosophically about energy. Section 2 
suggests an indirect reflection on energy inequality and injustice by presenting
some implications of contemporary “energivorous” lifestyles, 
namely those surrounded by techno-science and addicted to fossil fuels. 
In section 3, I discuss how the modern and scientific concept of energy 
is a cultural construct emerged during the early Industrial Revolution 
(Wrigley 2010) through the work of several natural philosophers, later 
known as disciplinary scientists and engineers (Frigo 2017). Understanding
the emergence of the scientific conceptualization of energy is 
pivotal to appreciate, evaluate and then challenge some key assumptions 
that lie at its basis. For instance, it is rarely appreciated that the energy 
discourse commonly depends on a rather specific understanding of the 
human-nature relationship that is tacitly assumed and taken for granted. 
In section 4, I will fully embrace the spirit of Relations and explore ways 
to think about energy as if humans were not the center and the measure of 
everything. Namely I will try to philosophize about energy beyond anthropocentrism.
This part constitutes the core of the article and supports the 
thesis that it is time to update and reorient the energy concept in an ecocentric
direction. I propose that an ecocentric philosophy of energy – or 
 Energy Ethics: Emerging Perspectives in a Time of Transition
9
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
an ecocentric energy ethic – can successfully integrate the understanding 
of energy produced by physics, chemistry and engineering with knowledge
and insights drawn from ecology, inter-species energy justice and 
ecocentric environmental philosophy. I argue that an ecocentric energy 
concept would improve the human-nature-energy relationship, updating 
humans’ understanding of the fundamental links between energy, ecology 
and ethics towards the actualization of strong sustainability (Neumayer 
2013). Section 5 concludes the editorial and clarifies the significance of 
the project. Throughout the text I also have the honor to introduce the 
inspiring contents of this collection.
2. HigH energy societies and tHe conundrum
 of energy transition
The commonly accepted basis of our economy is the 
supposed possibility of limitless growth, limitless wants, 
limitless wealth, limitless natural resources, limitless 
energy, and limitless debt.
Wendell Barry, Faustian Economics (2008)
Starting in the Western world, modern societies have become high energy 
socio-political assemblages (Illich 2015). In many parts of the globe, 
humans are extremely energivorous, addicted to a commodious lifestyle 
based on abundant and intense power, the availability of which they expect 
and take for granted (Borgmann 1984). Contemporary lifestyles are based 
on sophisticated techno-scientific premises and are unthinkable without 
recurring to ad hoc socio-political and economic apparatuses that guarantee
an enormous and steady input of resources into the system. 
Although Homo sapiens has always used the environment to survive 
(McElroy 2009, 2010; Pain 2017), it is especially over the last two centuries
that a growing number of humans have extracted from nature larger 
amounts of fuels and materials, exploiting not only the work of other 
humans, but especially that of animals and the services of ecosystems at 
rates that many consider unsustainable (Heinberg 2003, 2015; Elliott 2007; 
Brown 2009; Meadowcroft 2009). The astonishing rate of population 
growth has brought humans from 1.6 billion in 1900 to more than 7.6 billion
in 2018, an almost five-fold increase. In the span of just few decades a 
new animal has appeared, Homo energeticus who, through techno-scientific 
domination, reifies, commodifies and prices nature to serve its growing 
needs (Kowalsky and Haluza-DeLay 2013). 
 Giovanni Frigo
10
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
On this regard, Italian “human overpopulation” thinker Andrea 
Natan Feltrin tackles in his comment “Energy Equality and the Challenges 
of Population Growth” (second volume) the issue of energy equality in 
relation to human population growth. He argues that “going beyond the 
capitalistic myth of never-ending growth becomes a moral duty” if we are 
to attain a fair distribution of energies on a planet with limited resources. 
An energy transition to renewables is currently happening worldwide.
This seems to require the electrification of infrastructures and 
devices to attain the switch of entire systems (Meadowcroft 2009; Smil 
2010; Grubler 2012; Araújo 2014) to potentially 100% renewable sources 
(Delucchi and Jacobson 2011; Jacobson and Delucchi 2011; Jacobson 
2014; Jacobson et al. 2017). However, the opportunity of providing a 
reliable system 100% based on renewable sources has raised scientific 
controversies and feasibility doubts (Clack et al. 2017). An evolution of 
energy sources has always happened in the history of humanity (Fouquet 
and Pearson 2012), and in very different ways (O’Connor 2010), but current
energy transitions imply unprecedented scales and must deal with 
the addiction to, and dependence on fossil fuels. But, of course, energy 
transition is not only a policy issue and actually implies and expects 
behavioral changes of millions of people too. 
Dealing with a poignant example of such complex struggle, Italian 
anthropologist Alice Dal Gobbo’s article entitled “Desiring Ethics: Reflections
on Veganism from an Observational Study of Transitions in Everyday 
Energy Use”(second issue) adopts observational ethnographic methods to 
study everyday energy transitions in Northern Italy. Dal Gobbo presents 
empirical material to “reflect psycho-socially on the potentialities of veganism
as an energy ethics of sustainability” and warns of the danger of adopt-
ing a plant-based diet as an abstract moral imperative rather than a situated 
and nuanced ethical choice.
Like any systemic transformation, energy transition implies risks. These 
derive from unpredictable factors, uncertainty or ignorance. Since decisions 
must eventually be made, it is pivotal to address the ethical implications 
of just and sustainable energy transitions. In the present issue, Bertrand 
Andre Rossert’s article “Ethical Risk and Energy” explores the currently 
grey area between ethics and risk management, focusing specifically on the 
notion of ethical risk in relation to the energy sector. Rossert agrees that 
there is an urgent need for an energy ethics as a fundamental tool to evaluate
risk and proposes both a theoretical clarification of key concepts and 
a strategic pathway for the creation of a “risk management checklist”. He 
delves into the nuances of the notions of ethical violations, deterioration, 
and improvement offering a series of compelling and relatable examples. 
 Energy Ethics: Emerging Perspectives in a Time of Transition
11
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
An updated version of ethical risk (perhaps even a biocentric one) provides 
a richer understanding of uncertain situations often occurring in complex 
energy projects. Advocating for an energy ethics that begins with a risk 
approach, Rossert affirms that “when energy ethics is as developed as bioethics
is today, then energy companies will be able to take it into account”, 
thus leading to a significant improvement of energy ethics in practice.  
During this transition toward alternative and more sustainable systems, 
it is important to understand the premises from which we are moving. In 
other terms, we need to make sense of what it has meant to live for more 
than 200 years embedded in petrocultures (Black 2012; LeMenager 2014; 
Petrocultures Research Group 2016) which have allowed unprecedented, 
incredible transformations as well as problematic consequences. 
In the first article of this issue – “Ethics, Nafthism, and the Fossil Subject”
– Finnish philosophers Tere Vadén and Antti Salminen highlight that 
the presumed human “victory over nature” – an emblem of modern Western
thinking – is “supremely ironic” because its essential material condi-
tions depend on fossil fuels, a very natural occurrence. Expanding a thread 
of thought they started in their book Energy and Experience (2015), here 
the authors point out that the ethics of modern subjects is detached, forgetful
of its dependence on a specific energy regime. Vadén and Salminenhelp 
us understand humans’ entanglement with fossil fuels through a compelling 
“nafthology” and argue that a post-fossil energy ethics should ultimately be 
a-subjective and based on non-modern premises.
It is nowadays commonly agreed among climate and energy scholars 
that transitioning away from fossil fuels is the prerequisite for a meaningful 
worldwide contribution to climate change mitigation (Stephenson 2017) 
and has the potential to bolster significant technological innovation (Stolten 
and Scherer 2013). However, we might wonder whether techno-scientific 
strategies are enough for energy transitions that will take into account also 
non-human life. The question is not trivial because, again, it concerns the 
underlying assumptions of individual and collective lifestyles, policies and 
political decisions as well as the actual existence and wellness of non-human 
beings, biotic communities and ecosystems. In the wake of several other 
contemporary thinkers in energy humanities and social sciences, I hold 
that energy transition is not only a technical affair. Hence, it should not be 
understood only as a human socio-technological and economic problem, 
but also at its core as an ecological and philosophical one. Transitioning 
to clean and sustainable systems is intertwined with other dimensions of 
individual, social and ecosystemic life. Culturally and philosophically, they 
imply metaphysical, psychological, sociological, behavioral, gendered, legislative
and religious considerations. Ecologically, they take place within 
 Giovanni Frigo
12
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
complex ecosystems in which also other species require adequate space 
and resources to thrive. 
For example, one of the most interesting and yet quite rare perspectives
on the ethics of energy is that of religion. Expanding her pioneering 
work on energy ethics from a Christian standpoint (2016), Erin Lothes 
Biviano contributes to this volume with her comment “Catholic Energy 
Ethics: Commitments and Criteria”. In it, she lays the foundations for a 
theocentric theology of energy that is based on the “covenantal economy 
of creation and salvation”, a proposal that acknowledges humans’ privilege 
and addresses the irresponsibility for the implementation of an “integrated 
ecology of family, community, society, and earth”.
Again, what is important to remember is that both cultural and ecological
dimensions of the transitions are less visible than wind farms or Tesla 
Model 3 but, in my opinion, also essential to fully grasp their breadth and 
depth. If we ignore them by underestimating their influence or sweeping 
them under the rug as humanistic nuisance or unnecessary environmental 
alarmism, we run the risk of understanding only part of the story. As Janet 
Stephenson suggests, “to work effectively across disciplines, social scientists 
[and philosophers/ethicists] will need to learn something of what energy 
means, and physical scientists will need to learn something of what energy 
means” (Stephenson 2017). Environmental ethics, philosophy of technology, 
energy humanities and social sciences can help integrate the understanding 
of energy produced in the natural sciences toward a more holistic account.
In this special issue, three North American scholars specifically enlarge 
the boundaries of the energy discourse beyond anthropocentrism. In the 
first volume, Jacob Bethem’s article “Life within Energy Policy” proposes 
to recognize and integrate the powerful and shared concept of “life” (value 
and sacredness of, reverence for) in energy policy. Moving from environmental
philosophy, Bethem bridges his theoretical proposal to the case 
study of the Navajo Generating Station near Page, Arizona. In this way, he 
is able to show the possible concrete implications of a life-based philosophy
of energy within a specific Native American struggle of moving beyond 
fossil while reimagining the community’s future. 
On a similar note, Matthew J. Burke’s paper entitled “Mutually-Beneficial
Renewable Energy Systems” (also in this volume) adopts “a relational 
view of energy futures, emphasizing and shifting attention toward the role 
of nonhuman elements of renewable energy systems to explore opportunities
for rethinking renewable energy systems as processes for restoration 
and healing of human-nature relationships”. Burke develops the rationale 
for his proposal addressing four areas: practice, ecology, ethics and culture.
Then, he discusses several practical energy technologies with the goal 
 Energy Ethics: Emerging Perspectives in a Time of Transition
13
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
of not only avoiding or minimizing harm, but also supporting ecological 
enhancement and mutually-beneficial consequences for both human and 
non-human nature.
In the second volume, environmental philosopher Joseph M. Aloi 
brings us to the rural areas of West Virginia to delve into the intricacies 
and the trade-offs between the culture of coal extraction and food ethics. 
His “Coal Feeds My Family: Subsistence, Energy, and Industry in Central 
Appalachia” presents “the change in land-human relationships through the 
lens of food”. Aloi analyzes and deconstructs the metaphor “coal feeds my 
family” and offers a nuanced description of a multifaceted energy reality in 
which the fossil economy based on the dead (coal) struggles to make sense of 
its disintegration. Meantime, communities are rediscovering their rich preindustrial
agricultural energy economy and land-based culture. These three 
articles contribute significantly to the development of a nuanced philosophy 
of energy that moves beyond anthropocentrism, one that acknowledges and 
accounts for essential ecological, economic and socio-cultural interdependencies.
The relationship between economics, energy and human work is 
also discussed in Nora Ward’s review of the book Blood and Earth: Modern 
Slavery, Ecocide, and the Secret to Saving the World by Kevin Bales. Connecting
past and present types of slavery to the theme of energy, she discusses 
how “labor of human hands and human (and animal) bodies, occurring in 
conditions of coercion, poverty, and violence” still supplies “much of the 
raw energy for even the most advanced economies”. So, current planetary 
imbalances of energy access and distribution are coupled with a system of 
exploitation. Ward highlights that “this kind of labor is not only destructive
to the humans and human communities that it occurs in but also has 
devastating impacts on animals, plants, and wider ecological communities”.
3. tHe modern and scientific energy paradigm
Paradoxically, the term energy, used for the preceding 
300 years to designate the forcefulness of a face or the 
liveliness of a statement was first used to designate the 
“force of nature” precisely at the time when – in all the 
natural sciences – nature’s vitality, its “Lebenskraft”, 
was being systematically denied.
Ivan Illich, The Social Construction of Energy (2015)
Few topics are as important as energy. Indeed, energy is not so much a 
distinct topic as it is a thread woven throughout many of today’s most 
pressing issues – from political economy to ecology to science and tech-
 Giovanni Frigo
14
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
nology. As a result, there is no shortage of talk about energy. Especially 
since the oil crises of the early 1970s, one just needs to open a newspaper 
or scroll a webpage, to find a wide range of discussions that span from 
the energy costs of Bitcoin mining to surging wind development in West 
Texas, to talk of gas pipelines in southern Italy, the miracles of the Shale 
Revolution, or the promises of Tesla’s Powerwall. Yet, no matter what the 
topic of conversation, I contend that the discourse is grounded on a problematic
understanding of “energy”, a forma mentis that has its deep roots 
in the modern worldview, and specifically in a flawed assumption about 
the human-energy-nature relationship. I call this assumed understanding 
“the energy paradigm”, an account that has been produced by the natural 
sciences and has manifested in practice through the groundbreaking marvels
of engineering  1. In the discussion of such a paradigmatic worldview, I 
agree with Lynn White Jr. that what we do depends on what and how we 
think: “What people do about their ecology depends on what they think 
about themselves in relation to things around them” (1967). Similarly, the 
conceptualization of energy has had remarkable material consequences. 
I will explain that what we practically do in terms of power production, 
consumption, distribution and waste ultimately depends on what we think 
about energy. In this special issue, four authors directly challenge different 
aspects of the common understanding of energy. In very different ways, 
they suggest alternative outlooks which entail, overall, a profound reflection
on several ingrained cultural assumptions that are worth unpacking.
Dutch philosopher of energy Robert-Jan Geerts – one of the few contemporary
thinkers of techno-science who has engaged the theme of energy 
from an explicit philosophical perspective (Geerts et al. 2016; Geerts 
2017) – offers in this first issue a theoretical challenge to a dominant reasoning
of current energy transition discourse. His “Beyond Scarcity: Perspec-
tives on Energy Transition” evaluates and criticizes the two usual notions 
of “boundless consumerism” and “eco-frugality” as they problematically 
relate to ideas of well-being and good life. Geerts considers both concepts 
somehow flawed because they share and move from the unappealing and 
unpopular idea of scarcity. Alternatively, he suggests that a third path is 
available, namely that of qualitative abundance. Instead of scarcity, qualitative
abundance is based on ideas of prosperity and simplicity, hence it 
 1 I use the term paradigm as a “pattern” or “characteristic way” of conceptualizing 
energy, and indirectly of seeing the non-human world. This interpretation bridges both 
Thomas S. Kuhn’s “extended” or “global” meaning of scientific paradigm (Kuhn 1962; 
Kuhn 1969) and Albert Borgmann’s idea of a “pattern of technology” represented by the 
devices which constitute the modern way “to take up with the world” (Borgmann 1984).
 Energy Ethics: Emerging Perspectives in a Time of Transition
15
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
reframes the notion of a “good” energy system away from “too much or too 
little” and thus reshapes the lingo of the energy transition discourse.
The other three articles that challenge ulterior aspects of the energy 
paradigm will feature in the issue of November. French environmental 
cyclo-philosopher Damien Delorme challenges the common monopoly of 
the automobile transportation system in his exciting piece entitled “Contesting
the Radical Monopoly: a Critical View on the Motorized Culture 
from a Cyclonaut Perspective”. Delorme shares his six-months-longbike 
road trip across the United States following an imaginary ligne verte made 
of surprising intellectual and environmental encounters with both human 
and non-human animals  2. His journey represents a decentering experience 
that affords “a critical outlook on the norms and usages brought by the 
engine culture”. His paper proposes enriching our phenomenological experiences
of energy through “autonomous movement that broadens our social 
imagination and contributes to face our current environmental crisis”.
On a similar note, German philosopher Roman Meinhold moves away 
from mainstream considerations about energy as electricity or fossil fuels 
and focuses instead on neglected, yet crucial aspects of human energy. 
His article concerns the fundamental and often forgotten recognition that 
humans are active and moving beings. Meinhold deals with four types of 
human energy: interpersonal/social, movement, intellectual, and spiritual. 
His philosophical anthropology of energy merges phenomenology, virtue 
ethics, and a call for activity oriented toward wisdom. His proposal calls 
for a balanced and wise energy ethics that starts from within and requires 
practice. 
Finally, Italian independent intellectual Federico Battistutta’s comment,
provocatively entitled “Energy of Ethics / Ethics of Energy” chal-
lenges the culture-nature dichotomy. He adopts insights from thinkers 
such as Luce Irigaray and Sigmund Freud to inquiry types of psychic and 
emotional energy that are not very well represented in the literature of 
energy and ethics but deserve indeed more attention in order to broaden 
our understanding of energy’s ontology.
The work of these authors is in tune with, and seems to further support
my claim that there is indeed a conception of energy that is prevalent 
and tacitly assumed in the energy discourse generally and in the context of 
energy transition specifically. This notion implies a great number of features
typical of the modern period: a certain ideal of progress, assumptions 
of anthropocentrism linked to the commodification of nature, a strong reli
2 See his journey – Untaking Space: the U.S. Project – at: https://usproject2016.
com/.
 Giovanni Frigo
16
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
ance on the techno-scientific apparatus, a proactionary approach to risk 
assessment, free-market capitalism, individualistic and competitive values, 
and so on.
The scientific understanding of energy is a cultural construct produced 
in a very specific context, the Western, modern, and scientific world. 
Energy has been defined primarily by the natural sciences as a property 
of objects, that is the capacity of matter to do work. But this and other 
similar definitions stress only certain measurable, quantifiable and mechanistic
properties of reality leaving outside everything else. I claim that the 
modern energy paradigm has been emphasizing anthropocentric ideas 
and instrumental values within the human-energy-nature relationship. 
Again, its norms, values, and principles derive from a scientific, mechanistic,
quantitative, mathematized and even patriarchal approach that 
accounts only partially for the complexity of energy as a multi-faceted 
phenomenon  3. Moreover, these characteristics make it not only obviously 
reductionist but ecologically and philosophically problematic too. The key 
point is that such modern and scientific understanding of energy has been 
taken for granted, becoming the “traditional” way in which most people 
think and act about energy. In practice, the most important implication is 
that this mentality has been having remarkable consequences (i.e. human 
population growth, technoscientific advancements but also devastation and 
ecocides), transforming planet Earth in dramatic ways. Especially over the 
past two centuries, energy practitioners (policy-makers, engineers, politicians,
stakeholders) who have been operating according to this worldview 
have expanded built environments and at the same time drastically affected 
the non-human world and ecosystemic equilibria.
Since this Special Issue concerns energy and ethics, it is important 
to recall that the modern energy paradigm has its roots in the scientific 
attempt, starting in the 18th century, to “make sense” and name various 
phenomena related to, for example, heat exchanges, magnetism, light, 
electricity. The study of these phenomena was accompanied by the idea 
of improving the efficiency of different engines (e.g. steam, internal combustion),
and hence the productivity of machines. Therefore, the study of 
energy bears the weight of its initial aim, namely improving the efficiency 
of machines. As Vaclav Smil has put it,
Theoretical energy studies reached a satisfactory (though not a perfect) 
coherence and clarity before the end of the nineteenth century when, after 
 3 For the sake of focus, in this article I will not delve into the last of these characteristics.
One of the most thorough account of the relationships between patriarchy, control 
of nature and the scientific revolution is Merchant 1980 (see also Merchant 2006).
 Energy Ethics: Emerging Perspectives in a Time of Transition
17
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
generations of hesitant progress, the great outburst of Western intellectual 
and inventive activity laid down the firm foundations of modern science 
and soon afterwards developed many of its more sophisticated concepts. 
The ground work for these advances began in the seventeenth century, and 
advanced considerably during the course of the eighteenth, when it was 
aided by the adoption both of Isaac Newton’s (1642-1727) comprehensive 
view of physics and by engineering experiments, particularly those associated 
with James Watt’s (1736-1819) improvements of steam engines. (2006, 13)
The Western conceptualization of energy has depended on the scientific 
control of the forces of nature through mathematical language and the 
application of the scientific method: a rather homogeneous conception of 
energy emerged, which has become predominant and has been reigning 
substantially unchallenged in educational settings and policy-making. The 
blooming of the Industrial Revolution, a tremendous population expansion,
the diffusion of ideas of progress and human exceptionalism have 
increased human hubris, individualism and greed, with the support of ad 
hoc socio-economic and ethical theories (Moncrief 1970). These views are 
so deeply ingrained that they have become normalized, and consequently 
invisible.
Another article in this first issue helps us better understand and indirectly
appreciate the implications of the Western conceptualization of 
energy. In his “Renewable Energy Issues in Africa Contexts”, Nigerian 
philosopher Diana-Abasi Ibanga provides an intriguing analysis that begins 
by criticizing the Western approach as inappropriate or inadequate to fully 
understand African energy dynamics. Drawing from sources as rich and 
diverse as Braai filosofie, Bantu and Annang languages, Ibanga develops an 
“African-specific understanding of the complex nexus of human-environment-posterity”
and suggests principles and guidelines for ethical energy 
transitions and investment decisions broad enough and still peculiar to the 
African continent.
An ulterior challenge to the modern and scientific energy paradigm 
comes in this issue through the comment by anthropologist Deepti Chatti. 
In her “Cows, Cookstoves, and Climate Change: a Non-Anthropocentric 
View of Household Energy Use in the Rural Indian Himalayas”, Chatti 
shows how cows, cookstoves and climate change are interconnected in the 
worldview and in the livelihood of people in the rural Indian Himalayas. 
The real risk of imposing technological artefacts such as “improved LPG 
cookstoves” must deal, on the one hand, with the unequal adverse impacts 
of household burdens on the health of children and women. On the other 
hand, it faces the existence of profound, complex multi-species entanglements
between humans and cows, which also entail a specific gendered 
 Giovanni Frigo
18
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
care and responsibility for both human and non-human beings. Chatti’s 
comment thus contributes to a more complex understanding of energy in 
non-Western contexts and to the articulation of a more inclusive energy 
ethics.
Going back to my discussion regarding the modern scientific energy 
paradigm, I argue that it is problematic for several reasons but, first of all, 
because of its manifest anthropocentrism. The problem of an anthropocentric
energy paradigm is not limited to fossil fuels and their socio-environ-
mental implications. Even current transitions to renewable energy sources 
perpetuate the energy paradigm, that is, they largely fail to account for the 
non-human world. Moreover, as mentioned above, this notion of energy 
emphasizes instrumental, mechanistic, and quantitative properties of 
nature which are assumed in the study, management and consumption of 
the natural world. Energy projects and policies are focused on maintaining 
or expanding the current production of power, or extending its distribution,
for more human consumption. Questioning the deeper assumptions 
of such doings, evaluating alternative directions and addressing the related 
ecological consequences are only minor preoccupations. 
In the meantime, there are dramatic issues of energy poverty and 
access worldwide and, of course, it is still essential to provide basic access 
to electricity to more than one billion people. It is important to clarify 
upfront that criticizing the anthropocentric nature of the traditional energy 
paradigm does not conflict with issues of human justice and equity. In 
fact, although the discourse of energy justice that emerged during the past 
decade has been tackling these issues, it has also been substantially humancentered.
Yet, even though there is much good in the ongoing transitions 
to renewables and in the concerns of energy justice scholarship, they are 
both still problematically focused on humans and consider everything else 
as secondary, if at all. 
A transition to a truly just and sustainable energy future requires a 
change in mindset – about the human-energy-nature relationship – and not 
only a change in policies or technologies. Because I maintain that energy 
transitions should be just also in inter-species terms and ecologically sound, 
I suggest that a more inclusive and non-anthropocentric account of energy 
is needed. 
 Energy Ethics: Emerging Perspectives in a Time of Transition
19
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
4. toward a pHilosopHy of energy
 beyond antHropocentrism
I follow the guidance of Nature […] Not to stray from 
Nature and to mold ourselves according to her law and 
pattern – this is true wisdom.
Seneca, On the Happy Life (about 58 C.E.)
Some antecedents of the type of reasoning I will outline here began in 
the mid-1970s in the field of environmental philosophy and ethics. Ecocentrism
is a philosophical position that acknowledges and promotes the 
moral centrality and worth of all the species and the inanimate beings that 
live within different ecosystems of which humans are also considered an 
essential part. Non-human beings can be understood individualistically 
(each singular entity) or as part of communities (plants), populations (animals),
ecosystems, eco-regions, or even the entire Earth (Eckersley 1992; 
Callicott 2013). Although it has been accused of being excessively radical 
and even indicted for eco-fascism, ecocentrism need not be misanthropic. 
Indeed, the vast majority of ecocentric positions typically argue not against 
humanity, but rather against the centrality or primacy of human beings, 
and advocate for a reshaping of the human-nature relationship in less hierarchical
ways. Generally speaking, ecocentrism derives metaphysical and 
moral implications from the knowledge and insights of the ecological sciences
(Callicott 1986). Since its emergence in the early 1970s, ecocentrism 
has branched out into several versions, or philosophical positions. Some of 
the most influential and “classic” references are North American scholars 
Holmes Rolston III (1988; 1991) and John Baird Callicott (1989; 1999), 
along with Norwegian philosopher Arne Naess (1973; 1989), the father of 
the “Deep Ecology” movement.
Here, I embrace an ecological definition of energy à la Aldo Leopold, 
the conservationist and writer who, in “The Land Ethic” proposed the idea 
that the very functioning of nature depends on the circulation of a “fountain”
of solar radiation flowing through the land:  
Plants absorb energy from the sun. This energy flows through a circuit called 
the biota, which may be represented by a pyramid consisting of layers. The 
bottom layer is the soil. A plant layer rests on the soil, an insect layer on the 
plants, a bird and rodent layer on the insects, and so on up through various
animal groups to the apex layer, which consists of the larger carnivores. 
[…] Land, then, is not merely soil; it is a fountain of energy flowing through 
a circuit of soils, plants, and animals. Food chains are the living channels 
which conduct energy upward; death and decay return it to the soil. The 
circuit is not closed; some energy is dissipated in decay, some is added by 
 Giovanni Frigo
20
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
absorption from the air, some is stored in soils, peats, and long-lived forests; 
but it is a sustained circuit, like a slowly augmented revolving fund of life. 
(1949, 182-4)
This deliberately broad description, for instance, integrates, rather than 
oppose, the mechanistic definition of physics that reduces energy to the 
“capacity of doing work”, transforming nature into something to be used 
for the needs of humans. It is important to consider that thinking about 
energy from the perspective of environmental philosophy accomplishes 
two important goals. First, it enriches our understanding of energy in its 
conceptual and cultural dimensions. Second, and related, the proposal of 
an ecocentric outlook reshapes and reevaluates our relationships to the 
planet and its other (in)animate non-human beings. An ecocentric perspective
can shed light on the theoretical frameworks of the energy discourse, 
the soundness of its reasoning and the ecological, ethical and socio-political 
implications of its practical developments in energy policies and projects. 
4.1. Anthropocentrism vs ecocentrism
Environmental philosophy typically recognizes several possible ethical positions:
strong anthropocentrism, weak anthropocentrism, sensiocentrism, 
biocentrism and ecocentrism. An ecocentric account of energy directly 
challenges the anthropocentric nature of the modern energy paradigm. 
Surely enough, ecocentric positions have been developed by several scholars
in the field of environmental philosophy while others have criticized 
such “centric” lingo altogether (Samuelsson 2013). Ecocentrism should be 
understood as among the most radical philosophical positions that emerged 
during the environmental movement that started in Western countries in 
the 1960s. In a sort of parallel with the so-called second wave of feminism 
and the civil rights movement, environmental activism and scholarship initially
aimed at changing and moving beyond cultural narratives which had 
been supporting oppression – of women, of minorities, and of nature. 
In particular, ecocentric thinkers have derived the most radical philosophical
implications from the findings of the ecological sciences and envi-
ronmental studies (Frigo 2016). Accordingly, ecocentrists typically start 
by posing a great ontological and metaphysical challenge: re-defining and 
re-positioning human beings and their role within ecosystemic functioning 
rather than considering mankind at the top of the ecological hierarchy. It 
goes without saying that, if taken seriously, the consequences of this change 
of perspective would be groundbreaking for both human and non-human 
beings. It has been argued that humans, thanks to their ability to work in 
 Energy Ethics: Emerging Perspectives in a Time of Transition
21
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
groups, organize, cooperate, and eventually develop techno-science have 
progressively occupied the top ranks of the food chain. But, ecologically 
speaking, humans are not “top predators” and “dominators” but rather 
omnivorous animal somewhere in the middle of the food/energy pyramid. 
An ecocentric perspective challenges the idea that the Earth is necessarily 
destined to become a “human planet” as the ecomodernists envision. By 
limiting human hubris, ecocentrism decenters humans and thus provides 
a paradigm shift similar to that occurred in 16th century astronomy from 
geocentrism to heliocentrism. 
Ecocentrists maintain that also modern humans are still dependent 
on the ecosystems of which they are part and, paradoxically, still know so 
little about. Ecocentrism borrows from ecology the notion that, in each 
ecosystem, there is a myriad of different beings who are constantly born 
or formed, live, die, decay and are cyclically transformed in nutrients by 
decomposers as part of the biosphere functioning. Simply put, these are animals
(top predators, carnivores, omnivores, herbivores), primary producers 
(plants), decomposers (fungi) or detritivores (earthworms, woodlice, and 
sea cucumbers), minerals, soils, waters, airs  4. In this worldview, humans 
do not occupy a special place, yet they are considered “special animals” in 
the sense that their power to dramatically change nature is acknowledged.
Despite the “convergence hypothesis” of philosopher Bryan G. Norton 
(1991, 237-243) – “the view that if we have a suitably sophisticated anthropocentrism,
then in practice, anthropocentrism and nonanthropocentrism 
will converge” (McShane 2007) – when it comes to policymaking, the 
policy interests of anthropocentrists and nonanthropocentrists do not ultimately
nor obviously converge.
In both anthropocentric and ecocentric perspectives exergy is limited. 
But for the former, useful energy is primarily destined to benefit humans, 
while the latter posits that also the non-human world deserves the amounts 
necessary for its flourishing. Moreover, an ecocentric view suggests that 
there may exist immaterial, spiritual, or relational forms of energy that 
fall through the cracks of the old paradigm because they are not epistemologically
relevant or objectively measurable (they are non-quantitative 
and therefore non-mathematizable). However, these other more qualitative 
“dimensions” are relevant and should become part of the current energy 
debate. 
Since humans have the possibility to become keenly aware of their 
power, they can also decide to follow the ecocentric philosophy of energy 
 4 I intentionally borrow from Leopold the use of plurals for all these different beings. 
See his essay “The Land Ethic” in Leopold 1949.
 Giovanni Frigo
22
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
and live in ways that are compatible not only with their own survival and 
growth, but also with the preservation, flourishment, and wellbeing of 
other non-human beings. If we conceive the fluxes of energy throughout 
the ecosphere in this inter-dependent and relational way, we begin to better 
understand the alternative outlook provided by ecocentrism. 
The type of ecocentrism that I embrace here does not equalize humans 
with any other beings, but rather attempts to take into account the wellbeing
of the non-human world as well. It considers humans “special animals” 
who possess a tendency to become an invasive species. As a disclaimer for 
possible accusations of eco-fascism, I immediately clarify that humans, in 
this perspective, are still relevant yet not central. They are not put on a 
pedestal or glorified as the conquerors of nature. Instead their power is 
acknowledged upfront and, because of it, they are recognized in the role of 
ecological companions, or co-inhabitants rather than managerial stewards/
guardians or mere exploiters (de Groot et al. 2011). But this re-positioning 
of humans in the ecosphere goes hand in hand with the recognition of the 
limitedness of key environmental/energy factors, such as space and exergy 
(or useful energy). In a world currently hosting more than 7.6 billion 
people and counting, in the future there will inevitably be less available 
resources and space not only for humans, but also for all other beings who 
are present in a specific ecosystem. 
4.2. The balance between instrumental and intrinsic values
We have seen that the old energy paradigm taught humans to dominate 
nature and extract from it anything that may benefit them. But I also clarified
that humans need to use some parts of nature to survive, likewise other 
biotic organisms. So, the second characteristic of an ecocentric philosophy 
of energy follows the realization that there are ecological and thermodynamic
(broadly understood) thresholds. The key point is that they make it 
physically impossible to instrumentalize all nature for the benefit of some 
humans and the detriment of everything else. These are limitations inherent
to the functioning of the ecosphere as well as the technosphere (all 
machines have efficiency limits), affecting both humans and other beings 
for they all share, eventually, ecosystemic energy. This is either coming into 
the system as solar radiation or is already present on the planet in the form 
of converted solar radiation (e.g. fossil fuels). 
To better understand the instrumentality of the energy paradigm 
let’s use the example of a deontological theory and turn to Kant’s second 
formulation of the Categorical Imperative, known as the “Formula of 
 Energy Ethics: Emerging Perspectives in a Time of Transition
23
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
Humanity”  5. In his Groundwork of the Metaphysis of Morals (1785), Kant 
wrote: “The practical imperative will thus be the following: So act that you 
use humanity, in your own person as well as in the person of any other, 
always at the same time as an end, never merely as a means” (Kant 2011, 
87). Since I propose that the energy paradigm should combine instrumental 
and intrinsic value (rather than focusing only on the former), the Kantian 
deontological principle can be expanded to include non-human animals as 
well as inanimate beings. The re-formulation would be: “So act that you use 
nature, in your own person as well as in the person of any other (in)animate 
being (living and non-living), never as an end, and as little as possible as a 
means”. This extended definition takes into account the non-human world 
also in an intrinsic way. It recognizes that some reasonable use of nature 
for human ends is inevitable, but it points to the precautionary principle 
of non-action whenever the consequences are unclear or possibly dangerous
(Kriebel et al. 2001; DeFur and Kaszuba 2002; Cooney 2004; Sandin 
2004; COMEST 2005). Moreover, this formulation would be in tune with 
traditional conservation (Pinchot 1910; Callicott et al. 1999), radical conservation
(Adams 2006) as well as preservation (Muir 1911; Howard et al. 
1991). It would imply, and thus prescribe, that when basic human needs 
have been met there is no need for any ulterior instrumentalization of the 
non-human world. Energy-nature should not merely or solely be conceptualized
as a means, but rather the recognition of intrinsic value should 
become a priority, leading to actions aimed at preservation and ultimately 
protection (Norton 1986; Meyer 1997). 
Energetically speaking, the worldview of modernity pictures scarcity 
as a temporary inability to obtain more, and it sees limits as chains that 
constrain an absolute freedom towhich modern humans are somehow 
entitled. The ab-solutus character of the human-nature relationship is key 
in understanding the modern energivorous lifestyle. As it will appear more 
clearly, researching the ontological and axiological dimensions of energy 
is the first step towards a philosophy of energy that can help improve 
praxis – energy ethics – that is our practical relationship to energy as it is 
linked to energy policies, personal choices, preferences and political decisions
making. 
 5 It should be clarified that my “extension” of Kant’s deontological principle is 
appropriate only if, accordingly, the notion of agency is expanded beyond humans.
 Giovanni Frigo
24
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
4.3. A holistic and more qualitative view of energy
Contrary to the mechanistic view of energy promoted by the traditional 
energy paradigm, an ecocentric philosophy of energy offers a holistic 
account. Energy has been understood in multifaceted ways, and in its 
most material form as fuels and geo-chemical compounds, bio-chemically 
as the flux of nutrients within organic and inorganic life, metabolically as 
the transformation of food into movement and heat. However, there are 
other types of non-quantitative energies that people (and perhaps also 
other beings) can experience. Since these phenomena are not reducible to 
a quantitative and therefore measurable form, the traditional energy paradigm
has disregarded or tacitly ignored them. 
But isn’t it true that we often speak about a particularly energetic 
atmosphere in a room, of a special energy in a relationship, or the energy 
that one can perceive while meditating alone in the middle of a forest? 
Neuroscience may attempt to reduce also these phenomena to “states of 
the mind” related to specific chemicals and electric impulses in the brain, 
but that explanation would be, again, a form of reductionism dependent 
on a mechanistic and quantitative view. However, other areas of human 
knowledge are sometimes capable of intercepting these phenomena. 
In this regard, anthropology and ethnography of energy offer powerful 
lenses to appreciate a more qualitative side of inquiry. Another big part 
of human creativity that has been pushed out of the energy discourse are 
the humanities such as literature and poetry. For this reason, I argue that 
an ecocentric philosophy of energy and ethics would consider forms of 
expression such as poetry as qualitative sources of an understanding of 
energy, as much as the laws of thermodynamics are used to explain energy 
quantitatively. For example, we can find examples of this kind of work 
in the emerging field of energy humanities, but also in the poems ofintellectuals
such as Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau. Let 
me conclude this section with one of Thoreau’s poems, Nature, which 
perfectly merges the theme of intimate connection with the environment 
with a call for human humility:
O Nature! I do not aspire
To be the highest in thy choir, To
be a meteor in thy sky,
Or comet that may range on high;
Only a zephyr that may blow
Among the reeds by the river low;
Give me thy most privy place
Where to run my airy race.
 Energy Ethics: Emerging Perspectives in a Time of Transition
25
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
In some withdrawn, unpublic mead
Let me sigh upon a reed,
Or in the woods, with leafy din,
Whisper the still evening in:
Some still work give me to do, –
Only – be it near to you!
For I’d rather be thy child
And pupil, in the forest wild,
Than be the king of men elsewhere,
And most sovereign slave of care;
To have one moment of thy dawn,
Than share the city’s year forlorn.
Finally, borrowing Leopold’s ecocentric perspective, it can be said that 
an ecocentric philosophy of energy “enlarges the boundaries of the community
to include soils, waters, plants, and animals, or collectively: the 
land” (1949, 173). In the meantime, it at least decenters human beings and 
“charges” them with the role of being the responsible co-inhabitants, companions,
and tutors of the non-human world.
5. conclusion: tHe significance of tHis project
Energy is one of the most debated topics in contemporary public discussions
and it is the subject of an increasing amount of theoretical and applied 
research that is carried out especially by the STEM disciplines. Historically 
speaking, the energy discourse has indeed mostly relied on the expertise of 
techno-science. Its operative arm, engineering, has played a predominant 
role in deciding how to tackle and overcome issues related to energy production,
accessibility, distribution, consumption, and waste. This means 
that for more than two hundred years the study of energy and its countless
applications (and by a large extent also energy transition!) have been 
the domain of the natural sciences and engineering. This fact may appear 
obvious to many but, again, it depends on an underlying, invisible philosophy
of energy that has been taken for granted. This understanding affects 
not only the thinking (or thoughtlessness) of people but what they do in 
both the private and public spheres. Humans’ energy-related past and 
present practices, those being individual actions, social choices, or public 
policies fundamentally depend on the traditional energy paradigm but can 
be enhanced through the development of a radical ecocentric philosophy 
of energy provide the theoretical foundations for ecologically sound and 
just energy transitions.
 Giovanni Frigo
26
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
Besides the three goals mentioned in the beginning, I think that the 
significance of this Special Issue resides in the attempt to offer compelling
reflections that break the disciplinary model of “purified” academic 
philosophy (Frodeman 2010; Frodeman and Briggle 2016). Developing 
new ways of tackling real world problems demands philosophers and social 
scientists to get out of their comfortable dens. It requires them to become 
familiar with other branch of knowledge while preserving their curious and 
inquisitive attitude, methodology, and epistemological autonomy. Hopefully
the pages of these two volumes will shed some light on what it is like 
to philosophize about energy, with passion and enthusiasm, in a time of 
transition.
references
Adams, Jonathan S. 2006. The Future of the Wild: Radical Conservation for a Crowded 
World. Boston: Beacon Press. https://books.google.com/books?id=
 Iz2O7JBeuFcC&pgis=1.
Araújo, Kathleen. 2014. “The Emerging Field of Energy Transitions: Progress, Challenges,
and Opportunities”. Energy Research and Social Science 1. Elsevier: 
112-21. doi: 10.1016/j.erss.2014.03.002.
Berry, Wendell. 2008. “Faustian Economics: Hell Hath No Limits”. Harper’s Magazine
(May): 35-42.
Biviano, Erin Lothes, David Cloutier, Christiana Z. Peppard, and Jame Schaefer. 
2016. “Catholic Moral Traditions and Energy Ethics for the Twenty-First 
Century”. Journal of Moral Theology 5 (2): 1-36.
Black, Brian. 2012. Crude Reality: Petroleum and World History. Lanham: Rowman & 
Littlefield Publishers.
Borgmann, Albert. 1984. Technology and the Character of Contemporary Life: a Philosophical
Inquiry. Chicago - London: The University of Chicago Press.
Brown, Lester. 2009. Plan B 4.0. New York - London: W.W. Norton & Co. Inc.
Callicott, J. Baird. 1986. “The Metaphysical Implications of Ecology”. Environmental 
Ethics 8 (4): 301-15.
Callicott, J. Baird. 1989. In Defense of the Land Ethic: Essays in Environmental Philosophy.
New York: SUNY Press.
Callicott, J. Barid. 1999. Beyond the Land Ethic: More Essays in Environmental Philosophy.
New York: SUNY Press.
Callicott, J. Barid. 2013. Thinking Like a Planet: the Land Ethic and the Earth Ethic. 
Oxford - New York: Oxford University Press.
Callicott, J. Baird, Larry B. Crowder, and Karen Mumford. 1999. “Current Normative
Concepts in Conservation”. Conservation Biology 13 (1): 22-35. doi: 
10.1046/j.1523-1739.1999.97333.x.
 Energy Ethics: Emerging Perspectives in a Time of Transition
27
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
Clack, Christopher T.M., Staffan A. Qvist, Jay Apt, Morgan Bazilian, Adam R. Brandt, 
Ken Caldeira, Steven J. Davis, et al. 2017. “Evaluation of a Proposal for Reliable
Low-Cost Grid Power with 100% Wind, Water, and Solar”. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences 114 (26): 6722-6727. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.1610381114.
COMEST. 2005. The Precautionary Principle. Paris: UNESCO. http://unesdoc.
unesco.org/images/0013/001395/139578e.pdf.
Cooney, Rosie. 2004. The Precautionary Principle in Biodiversity Conservation and 
Natural Resource Management: an Issues Paper for Policy-Makers, Researchers 
and Practitioners. http://data.iucn.org/dbtw-wpd/edocs/pgc-002.pdf.
DeFur, Peter L., and Michelle Kaszuba. 2002. “Implementing the Precautionary 
Principle”. Science of the Total Environment 288 (1-2): 155-65. doi: 10.1016/
S0048-9697(01)01107-X.
de Groot, Mirjam, Martin Drenthen, and Wouter T. de Groot. 2011. “Public Visions 
of the Human/Nature Relationship and Their Implications for Environmental 
Ethics”. Environmental Ethics 33 (1): 25-44. doi: 10.5840/
 enviroethics20113314.
Delucchi, Mark A., and Mark Z. Jacobson. 2011. “Providing All Global Energy with 
Wind, Water, and Solar Power. Part II: Reliability, System and Transmission 
Costs, and Policies”. Energy Policy 39 (3). Elsevier: 1170-90. doi: 10.1016/j.
enpol.2010.11.045.
Eckersley, Robyn. 1992. Environmentalism and Political Theory: Towards an Ecocentric
Approach. London: UCL Press. doi: 10.1007/s13398-014-0173-7.2.
Elliott, David. 2007. Sustainable Energy: Opportunities and Limitations. New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Fay, James A., and Dan S. Golomb. 2012. Energy and the Environment. Oxford - New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Frigo, Giovanni. 2016. “Algae Harvesting and Energy Ethics: an Opportunity to 
Enhance Responsibility Towards Future Generations?”. In Energy Ethics: 
Intergenerational Perspectives in and for the ASEAN Region, edited by Roman 
Meinhold, 67-98. Bangkok: Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung e.V.
Frigo, Giovanni. 2017. “Energy Ethics, Homogenization, and Hegemony: a Reflection
on the Traditional Energy Paradigm”. Energy Research & Social Science 30 
(June): 7-17. doi: 10.1016/j.erss.2017.06.030.
Frodeman, Robert. 2010. “Experiments in Field Philosophy”. New York Times, 
November 23. https://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/11/23/
 experiments-in-field-philosophy/.
Frodeman, Robert, and Adam Briggle. 2016a. Socrates Tenured: the Institutions of 
21st-Century Philosophy. London: Rowman and Littlefield International.
Geerts, Robert-Jan. 2017. Philosophical Explorations on Energy Transition. PhD 
Thesis, Wageningen University. doi: 10.18174/400887.
Geerts, Robert-Jan, Bart Gremmen, Josette Jacobs, and Guido Ruivenkamp. 2016. 
“Towards a Philosophy of Energy”. Scientiae Studia 12, Special Issue: 1-12. 
doi: 10.1590/S1678-31662014000400006.
 Giovanni Frigo
28
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
Heinberg, Richard. 2003. The Party’s Over: Oil, War and the Fate of Industrial Societies.
Gabriola Island, BC: New Society Publisher.
Heinberg, Richard. 2015. Afterburn: Society Beyond Fossil Fuels. Gabriola Island, BC: 
New Society Publisher.
Hopkins, Rob. 2008. The Transition Handbook: from Oil Dependency to Local Resilience.
White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing.
Howard, George S., Edward Delgado, Deloria Miller, and Sarah Gubbins. 1991. 
“Transforming Values into Action: Ecological Preservation Through Energy 
Conservation”. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences 9 (2): 183-205. doi: 
10.1177/07399863870092005.
Illich, Ivan. 2015. “The Social Construction of Energy”. In Beyond Economics and 
Ecology: the Radical Thought of Ivan Illich, edited by Sajay Samuel, 105-23. 
London - New York: Marion Boyars Publishers.
Jacobson, Mark Z. 2014. Powering Countries, States, and the World With Wind, Water, 
and Sunlight. PowerPoint presentation, February.
Jacobson, Mark Z., and Mark A. Delucchi. 2011. “Providing All Global Energy with 
Wind, Water, and Solar Power. Part I: Technologies, Energy Resources, 
Quantities and Areas of Infrastructure, and Materials”. Energy Policy 39 (3). 
Elsevier: 1154-69.
Jacobson, Mark Z., Mark A. Delucchi, Zack A.F. Bauer, Savannah C. Goodman, William
E. Chapman, Mary A. Cameron, Cedric Bozonnat, et al. 2017. “100% 
Clean and Renewable Wind, Water, and Sunlight All-Sector Energy Roadmaps
for 139 Countries of the World”. Joule 1 (1). Elsevier: 108-21. doi: 
10.1016/j.joule.2017.07.005.
Kant, Immanuel. 2011. Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals: a German-English 
Edition, edited by Mary Gregor and Jens Timmermann. Cambridge - New 
York: Cambridge University Press. doi: 10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004.
Kowalsky, Nathan, and Randolph Haluza-DeLay. 2013. “Homo Energeticus: Technological
Rationality in the Alberta Tar Sands”. In Jacques Ellul and the Techno-
logical Society in the 21st Century, 159-75. Dordrecht: Springer. doi: https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-6658-7_12.
Kriebel, D., J. Tickner, P. Epstein, J. Lemons, R. Levins, E.L. Loechler, M. Quinn, 
R. Rudel, T. Schettler, and M. Stoto. 2001. “The Precautionary Principle in 
Environmental Science”. Environmental Health Perspectives 109 (9): 871-6. 
doi: 10.2307/3454986.
Kuhn, Thomas S. 1962. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 4th ed. Chicago: The 
University of Chicago Press. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511613975.
Kuhn, Thomas S. 1969. “Energy Conservation as an Example of Simultaneous Discovery”.
In Critical Problems in the History of Science. Clagett, MA: The Uni-
versity of Wisconsin Press.
LeMenager, Stephanie. 2014. Living Oil: Petroleum Culture in the American Century. 
Oxford - New York: Oxford University Press.
Leopold, Aldo. 1949. A Sand County Almanac: and Sketches Here and There. Oxford - 
New York: Oxford University Press. doi: 10.2307/1319034.
 Energy Ethics: Emerging Perspectives in a Time of Transition
29
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
McElroy, Michael B. 2009. Fueling the Planet: the Past, Present, and Future of Energy. 
Maryland: Recorded Books.
McElroy, Michael B. 2010. Energy: Perspectives, Problems, & Prospects. Oxford - New 
York: Oxford University Press.
McShane, Katie. 2007. “Anthropocentrism vs. Nonanthropocentrism: Why Should 
We Care?”. Environmental Values 16 (2): 169-185.
Meadowcroft, James. 2009. “What about the Politics? Sustainable Development, 
Transition Management, and Long Term Energy Transitions”. Policy Sciences 
42 (4): 323-40. doi: 10.1007/s11077-009-9097-z.
Merchant, Carolyn. 1980. The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology, and the Scientific 
Revolution. San Fransisco: HarperCollins.
Merchant, Carolyn. 2006. “The Scientific Revolution and the Death of Nature”. Isis 
97: 513-33. doi: 10.1086/508090.
Meyer, John M. 1997. “Gifford Pinchot, John Muir, and the Boundaries of Politics in 
American Thought”. Polity 30 (2): 267-84.
Moncrief, Lewis W. 1970. “The Cultural Basis for Our Environmental Crisis”. Science 
170 (3957): 508-12.
Muir, John. 1911. My First Summer in the Sierra. Boston - New York: Houghton Mifflin 
Co. - Riverside Press.
Naess, Arne. 1973. “The Shallow and the Deep, Long-Range Ecology Movement: A 
Summary”. Inquiry 16 (1): 95-100. doi: 10.1080/00201747308601682.
Naess, Arne. 1989. Ecology, Community and Lifestyle: Outline of an Ecosophy. 
 Cambridge - New York: Cambridge University Press. doi: 10.1016/01695347(89)90047-5.
Neumayer, Eric. 2013. Weak versus Strong Sustainability. Exploring the Limits of Two 
Opposing Paradigms. Cheltenham, UK - Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar 
Publishing. doi: 10.4337/9781781007082.
Norton, Bryan G. 1986. “Conservation and Preservation: a Conceptual Rehabilitation”.
Environmental Ethics 8 (3): 195-220. doi: 10.5840/enviroethics1986832.
Norton, Bryan G. 1991. Toward Unity Among Environmentalists. New York - Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Pain, Stephanie. 2017. “Power through the Ages”. Nature 551 (7682): S134-S137. doi: 
10.1038/d41586-017-07506-z.
Petrocultures Research Group. 2016. After Oil: Explorations and Experiments in the 
Future of Energy, Culture, and Society. Edmonton, AB: Petrocultures Research 
Group.
Pinchot, Gifford. 1910. The Fight for Conservation. New York: Doubleday, page & 
Co.
Rolston III, Holmes. 1988. Environmental Ethics: Duties to and Values in the Natural 
Environment. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Rolston III, Holmes. 1991. “Environmental Ethics: Values in and Duties to the Natural
Environment”. In Ecology, Economics, Ethics: the Broken Circle, edited by 
F. Herbert Bormann and Stephen R. Kellert, 73-96. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
 Giovanni Frigo
30
Relations – 6.1 - June 2018
http://www.ledonline.it/Relations/
Salminen, Antti, and Tere Vadén. 2015. Energy and Experience: an Essay in Nafthology.
Chicago: MCM Publishing. doi: 10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004.
Samuelsson, Lars. 2013. “At the Centre of What? A Critical Note on the CentrismTerminology
in Environmental Ethics”. Environmental Values 22 (5): 627-
645. doi: 10.3197/096327113X13745164553879.
Sandin, P. 2004. The Precautionary Principle in the 20th Century: Late Lessons from 
Early Warnings. Journal of Risk Research, vol. 7.
 doi: 10.1080/1366987042000176271.
Smil, Vaclav. 2006. Energy: a Beginner’s Guide. Oxford: Oneworld Publications.
Smil, Vaclav. 2010. Energy Transitions: History, Requirements, Prospects. Santa Barbara:
Praeger ABC-CLIO.
Stephenson, Janet. 2017. “What Does Energy Mean? An Interdisciplinary Conversation”.
Energy Research and Social Science 26. Elsevier: 103-6. doi: 10.1016/j.
erss.2017.01.014.
Stolten, Detlef, and Viktor Scherer. 2013. Transition to Renewable Energy Systems. 
Weinheim: Wiley-VCH. doi: 10.1002/9783527673872.indsub.
White, Lynn Jr. 1967. “The Historical Roots of Our Ecologic Crisis”. Science (New 
York, N.Y.) 155 (3767): 1203-7. doi: 10.1126/science.155.3767.1203.
Wrigley, Edward A. 2010. Energy and the English Industrial Revolution. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
