The FASEB Journal • DVD Series Review
Eric Kandel and Charlie Rose: A Stylish Synapse
A review of The Brain Series
(televised on The Charlie Rose Show,
syndicated by the Public Broadcasting
System, now available on DVD)
Thoru Pederson1
Program in Cell and Developmental Dynamics, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts, USA 10605
In any medium (from the rostrum, in print, or as video),
presenting science both accurately and engagingly to lay
audiences is a noble cause. This is so because, when done
at its best, it can instill in laypersons the same, or at least
a good dose of, rapture of knowing that we scientists feel
ourselves as our driving force. It is also noble because such
forums typically reveal something of the process of science
(and it is noteworthy that the word’s Latin root is not
“knowledge”, as often stated, but the present participle,
i.e., the process of knowing). And a third reason such
presentations are such high form is that they typically are
a chance for a lay audience to hear or read a true master
of the subject, for that is what it takes to do this when it is
done best. Many of the recipients of the Public Welfare
Medal of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences over the
years were chosen on the basis of their commitment and
skill in conveying science to general audiences.
Of course, this art has been attempted by many well
intentioned scientists, and on rare occasions has been
achieved with a level of brilliance that will shine for all
recorded time. In the 19th century, Thomas Huxley and
Louis Pasteur were among those biologists whose influence
with lay audiences was equal to (and sometimes
greater than) their suasion with peers. The pantheon in
our times was defined by Richard Feynman (physics),
Lewis Thomas (biology and medicine), Stephen Jay
Gould (evolution) and Carl Sagan (the cosmos). I would
put Loren Eiseley (anthropology) on a second tier only
because his writings were typified by an evident sadness
and depressive persona, from which he in fact suffered.
His encounter with a fox however is as haunting a piece of
science writing as there is and many lay persons know
Eiseley best, or only, by that essay.
Charlie Rose is widely admired as a supremely articulate
television host who consistently manages not only to get
interesting guests but is able to evoke a great deal from
them. One reason is that he is always well prepared;
another is that he is congenial. I watch his show all the
time and often think he talks too much. But I admire him
nonetheless because his show is consistently engaging and
illuminating. When the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
held its celebration of the 50th anniversary of the double
helix at an upscale Manhattan venue, they chose Charlie
Rose as moderator. Wisely done.
Around 2007 or so, The Charlie Rose Show got the idea
to do a series on the brain. PBS had run many shows on
the brain or mind (we’ll get back to whether or not they
are the same) in its NOVA series, and on Scientific
American Frontiers, featuring Alan Alda (who brought
viewers into neuroscience labs and asked good questions,
endearing him to many viewers, myself in-
cluded.) The Charlie Rose Show series on the brain
launched on October 29, 2009; the topics and panelists
arte listed in Table 1. To be sure, given the amount of
air time envisioned, the topic was going to be tackled in
considerable breadth and depth, a formidable challenge
and distinct from the aforementioned NOVA and
Scientific American Frontiers shows which, while all
well done, were topically more focused, discrete
quanta. Charlie Rose and his producers had lined up a
secret weapon, and it made all the difference.
But first, let’s pause for a moment and consider how
one would do this altogether. Would one start with
neuroanatomy (in which the amygdala seems to never be
omitted in any presentation) or maybe, at the other pole,
the history of the mind and consciousness as abstract vs.
empirical concepts? Would one take a disease or trauma
approach (the latter so much now in the America’s
1 Correspondence: Program in Cell and Developmental Dynamics,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacol-
ogy, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA
01605, USA. E-mail: thoru.pederson@umassmed.edu
doi: 10.1096/fj.11-0503ufm
1438 0892-6638/11/0025-1438 © FASEB
 consciousness, no pun intended, with our hopes for
Gabrielle Giffords and concussed football players)?
Would one try to explain the Nernst equation and why the
membrane resting potential changes by 59 millivolts for
every 10-fold change in the extracellular potassium ion
concentration? Or how a neurotransmitter evokes a postsynaptic
calcium release? Or even more esoteric questions
such as why many neurotransmitters are, or are close
relatives of, amino acids? A series on the brain of the scale
The Charlie Rose Show was pondering would also need to
decide on how to balance coverage of the known (we can
agree this is a lot, post-Vesalius, post-Broca) vs. the unknown
(also a lot, maybe exceeding what we know, as I
and many others suspect). And a second question: would
the focus best be on how key discoveries have been made;
or should it be instead on what we know (forget how we
found out) and maybe aim for a look to the future? Third,
how should such a series balance aspects of the brain
which are part of the established science called neurobiology
vs. those that are deemed by some as “softer,” such
as cognition and mood? (Happily, these emergent and
other properties of the mind have increasing degrees of
observational and experimental science behind our current
understanding of them, a fact the series powerfully
brought out.) And finally, who would be chosen to sit
down with Charlie Rose and address the brain, given
legitimate and illegitimate disputes that exist in neuroscience,
psychiatry and psychology, including over-the-top
careerists or bio-political, axe-grinding personalities that
could doom such a well-intentioned series of broadcasts?
What does one do to solve all these challenges? One
does what certain communities did/do in some times and
some places when there was/is a problem. One consults
the rabbi. In neuroscience, in our time, there is only one.
As we shall discuss, the series was a great success and much
credit goes to writers and the platinum quality of panelists.
But writers and panelists, however skilled, could not have
made the show the success it was without a focal intellectual
sparkplug and expository tour guide. This reb, this
teacher, was Eric Kandel.
Watching each show in the series, and now looking at
them again as I did before writing this review, what one sees
is not merely Kandel’s breadth and depth of knowledge.
Many neuroscientists know as much. What is more striking is
the integrative power of his mind on the one hand, and his
extraordinary ability to detect, with impressive hypersensitivity,
just the phrase or metaphor that a lay person would need
to get a concept. In each program, Charlie Rose starts off
with an extremely well scripted introduction and then introduces
Kandel. In early shows Rose tags him “our distin-
guished guest” and later Kandel becomes “our good friend.”
All this comes across as a very natural evolution and indeed
it seems likely that the two of them indeed struck a good
friendship during production of the series.
In each program, once Rose has finished with an engaging
hook, Kandel presents a more nuanced synopsis of the
show to come. If one were to take each of his intros and run
them together in a DVD, without the subsequent panelists, I
think most any viewer of that spliced piece would become an
instant addict and pay/give a lot to see the full shows
themselves. That is how skillfully Kandel sets up each segment.
It is to be emphasized that, as mentioned at the
outset, explaining to a general audience why a particular
area of science is interesting employs a different part of
the brain than just reciting the facts (and thus this art is
itself a neuroscience phenomenon, including the question
of why some Nobelists can do it and others, with that
same Stockholm stardust on their shoulders, cannot).
Viewed from 30,000 feet, the series does not get into the
mechanics of neuroscience (anent some of the hypothetical
questions posited earlier in this review). The Nernst equation
and such things were not the stuff of this show’s didactic
design. I would have not done otherwise and applaud the
relative lack of core neurobiology. The major topics (Table
1) had panelists who were accomplished, erudite, and articulate,
with almost no exceptions. The program on neurode-
generative disease had one panelist who was allowed much
more time than the others, to a dispiriting degree in my view,
and there are other small complaints one could register here
and there. But the overwhelming integral is success in both
topical breadth and the evocative power of the panelists. The
program on mental illness was the most engaging to me, not
only because I have a schizophrenic son, but also because the
story of one of this show’s panelists is so remarkable. For
decades, the universally accepted outcome standard in
schizophrenia was “one third improve, one third do not, and
the other third kill themselves.” Like all “exceptions to the
rule” in mental illness, this segment of the series teaches us
TABLE 1. Topics and Panelists
Topics Panelists
Introduction Cornelia Bargmann, Gerald Fischbach, Tony Movshon, John Searle
Vision Edward Adelson, Nancy Kanwisher, Tony Movshon, Pawan Sinha
The Acting Brain Robert Brown, Tom Jessell, John Krakauer, Daniel Wolpert,
The Social Brain Cornelia Bargmann, Gerald Fischbach Kevin Pelphrey, Giacomo Rizzolatti
The Developing Brain Patricia Kuhl, Elizabeth Spelke, Stephen Warren, Huda Zoghbi
The Aging Brain John Hardy, Brenda Milner, Scott Small, Larry Squire
The Emotional Brain Eric Nestler, Daniel Salzman, Wolfram Schultz, Nora Volkow
The Anxious Brain David Anderson, Antonio Damasio, Joseph LeDoux, Kerry Ressler
The Mentally Ill Brain Kay Redfield Jamison, Jeffrey Lieberman, Helen Mayberg, Elyn Saks, Stephen Warren
The Disordered Brain Nancy Bonini, Mahlon DeLong, John Donoghue, John Krakauer
The Deciding Brain Ray Dolan, Joshua Greene, Tony Movshon, William Newsome
The Creative Brain Chuck Close, Richard Serra, Oliver Sacks, Ann Temkin
1439BOOK REVIEW: THE BRAIN SERIES
 that there is much we do not know. This panelist’s presence
in the series is surely one of the most remarkable expositions
of psychosis and a recovery from it ever recorded.
A friend of mine was for some years on the Karolinska
Institute committee that decides on the Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine. One year when I was in Stockholm
as the external examiner of his Ph.D. student, he asked me
about my predictions that year. A few weeks later, it was
announced that the prize was going to the pioneers of MRI.
He asked me if I had been thinking about that possibility and
I replied no. He said “Thoru, that’s my point. You and your
colleagues are usually thinking in a narrow range but we
have to consider everything under the sun in all of Medicine
and Physiology.” Of course, MRI was a wonderful and fully
deserved choice. Functional MRI was another highlight in
the Charlie Rose series and I thought this program especially
hybridized the discovery, basic neuroscience, and applied
dimensions. Someday I suppose we might have a database of
the fMRI readouts of people listening to Mendelsohn vs.
Schumann vs. Wagner, and of those who want to write essays
about these composers vs. others who sit quietly and love/
hate one or more of them but cannot bring themselves to
preach why. Such “fMRI-ology” might someday help to
identify darker aspects of the human condition. This was
among the best of the consistently engaging programs in the
series.
A recent visit to the MIT Museum with a grandson
brought us into confluence with new exhibits around
the 150th anniversary of that great institution. But we
had to once again go back and look at a permanent
exhibit, in which a panel of faces all look the same
viewed up close, and yet devolve into discrete famous
people as one steps back 20 paces. This popular exhibit
is based on work by a MIT neuroscience team who are
looking at how we perceive shapes and cues at different
ranges. The experience of visiting this exhibit leaves no
doubt that there are, to quote Shakespeare (from
Hamlet): “There are more things in heaven and earth,
Horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy.” The
Charlie Rose program on perception in this series will
likely never be excelled for its expository power. The
panelists were perfectly chosen as to their medical and
scientific angles and one of them has even experienced
an encounter with the subtleties of visual perception
from his own ophthalmological pathology, having brilliantly
written on the subject of neurology for decades.
Overall, this sweeping series on the brain will long stand as
sui generis. Completing this review I got to wondering if the
Kandel-Rose series were a book, how would it compete with
ones already on our shelves? So I walked around my study
and pulled down several books that are, or bear on, neuroscience.
They included: Girl Interrupted by Susanna Kaysen;
Henry David Thoreau: Cycles and Psyche by Michael Sperber;
The Noonday Demon by Andrew Solomon; A Beautiful Mind by
Sylvia Nasar; Wherever You Go There You Are by Jon Kabat-Zinn;
An Anthropologist on Mars by Oliver Sacks; The Phenomenon of
Man by Teilhard de Chardin; The Origin of Consciousness in the
Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind by Julian Jaynes; Cybernetics by
Norbert Weiner; Creating Mind by John Dowling; Controlling
Life: Jacques Loeb and the Engineering Ideal in Biology by Philip J.
Pauly; On Human Nature by E. O. Wilson; The Astonishing
Hypothesis by Francis Crick; The Healing Hand by Guido
Majno; Biophysical Science- A Study Program, edited by J.L.
Oncley et al.; and Principles of Neural Science by Eric R. Kandel
and James H. Schwartz. This may seem a curious collection
in the home study of a cell biologist who works on RNA and
has never dabbled in neurobiology beyond lab courses as a
student, looking at crayfish inhibitory fiber firing among
other wonderful things under the sun in a field that I almost
chose. But to the point of the rhetorical question raised now,
I looked again at each of these books and asked if any one of
them was as coherent a body of engagement as the Charlie
Rose series. Some are very creative (Sperber and Crick),
others are powerful stories of survival (Kaysen, Solomon, and
Nasar), one is erudition honed in rarely matched form
(Majno), another is a moving philosophical tract that approaches
the shores of the mind (de Chardin), others are an
accurate look at the future when they were published (Oncley
et al. and Weiner), one was a new view (Wilson), another
is spellbinding history (Pauly), one is a powerful treatise on
controlling emotion (Kabat-Zinn), two are sterling expository
presentations (Sacks and Dowling), and one is in my
opinion a woefully misdirected hypothesis (Jaynes). Another,
and its successive editions (Kandel and Schwartz), is a
text that has never been surpassed. While I enjoyed reminiscing
how I had first encountered these books over my
career, and feeling a surge of intellectual loyalty and fondness
for their presence my library (not withstanding Jaynes),
as I looked at them again and pondered their epistemological
timing and didactic power, I decided that the series Eric
Kandel and Charlie Rose produced would, if rendered as a
book, stand above them all if judged by the criterion of
addressing a lay audience, or even a non-neurobiologist
scientist like me.
By now, dear reader, you have surely gotten the reviewer’s
message: buy, borrow or steal* this DVD set.
*I will post bail.
Tribute: In writing this review I was reminded of all that Jimmy
Schwartz (1932–2006) did for the field of neuroscience, and of
our many stimulating encounters during Woods Hole summers
over the years. His memory courses all throughout this review.
The opinions expressed in editorials, essays, letters to the editor, and other articles comprising the Up Front section are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the opinions of FASEB or its constituent societies. The FASEB Journal welcomes all points of view and many voices.
We look forward to hearing these in the form of op-ed pieces and/or letters from its readers addressed to journals@faseb.org.
1440 Vol. 25 May 2011
The FASEB Journal  www.fasebj.org
