appendix b american individualist anarchists of the nineteenth century This is, all in all, a formidable, if pointedly eccentric, crew, andthe greatest figures of this political tradition—Warren, Thoreau, Ballou, Garrison, Spooner, and occasionally Emerson—are persons of substantial accomplishment in a variety of fields. Adin Ballou (b. 1803, Cumberland, Rhode Island, d. 1890): Unitarian/Res- torationist minister, abolitionist, and absolute nonresistant. In 1842 Ballou founded the religious Hopedale community in Worcester Country, Massachusetts. His book Christian Non-resistance (1846) is an under-read but fundamentally influential scriptural argument for pacifism. Ballou corresponded with Tolstoy on this subject. He was one of the few abolitionist nonresistants to condemn John Brown’s raid unambiguously and to remain a pure pacifist throughout the Civil War. Ballou’s Practical Christian Socialism (1854) contained criticisms of Warren and the equity movement. William Lloyd Garrison (b. 1805, Newburyport, Massachusetts, d. 1879): Like Warren, a printer; publisher of the famous/notorious abolitionist paper The Liberator. Leader of the radical wing of American abolition- ism, arguing from a radical Protestant perspective for the immediate { 264 } american individualist anarchists 265 abolition of slavery and the secession of the non-slave states. He was also an advocate of feminism and nonresistance, the latter on biblical grounds. From his radical pacifism, Garrison concluded that human governments, all of which rest on force, are entirely illegitimate. Lysander Spooner (b. 1808, Athol, Massachusetts, d. 1887): A deist, aboli- tionist, and individualist anarchist. His work The Unconstitutionality of Slavery (1845) is an amazingly accomplished exercise in legal inter- pretation, taking a position rejected by the Garrisonians, who held that the Constitution recognized slavery, and thus that the U.S. govern- ment was illegitimate. Lawyer and legal scholar are odd occupations for an anarchist, though Spooner, like Warren, never referred to him- self as an ‘‘anarchist.’’ In his time, he set up a private competitor to the U.S. Postal Service and tried to organize an incursion to free John Brown after the Harper’s Ferry raid. Such works as No Treason (1867– 70) and Vices Are Not Crimes (1875) are classics of libertarian thought. The central idea (as it was not for Warren or the transcendentalists) is the concept of natural rights. Stephen Pearl Andrews (b. 1812, Templeton, Massachusetts, d. 1886): An- drews moved to Louisiana as a young man and practiced law in Texas, and in the South he became an abolitionist. A scholar of odd accom- plishments, he introduced the Pitman shorthand into the United States, in part, to help ex-slaves learn to read, and he supposedly mas- tered thirty-two languages. Often the spearhead of reform projects (in- cluding Modern Times), his commitments were mercurial. His book The Science of Society (1851) is presented explicitly as an explication of Warren’s ideas. He formed a number of scandalous semisecret organi- zations, including the League of the Men of Progress and the Grand Order of Recreation. Even as he was promoting Modern Times, he founded the ‘‘Pantarchy’’ near Union Square in New York City, ‘‘a Grand Composite Order of Government’’ on Fourierist/Warrenian lines, with himself as ‘‘Pantarch.’’ His Basic Outline of Universology (1872) shows remarkable affinities to Charles Sanders Peirce’s thought, obsessed as it is with triads and semiotics. He later produced the first American translation of The Communist Manifesto for Woodhull and Claflin’s Weekly. Henry David Thoreau (b. 1817, Concord, Massachusetts, d. 1862): Among the best-known American prose stylists, he wrote work that was politi- cal from the outset. The religious skepticism and anarchism expressed in his first major work, A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers 266 appendix b (1849), would have been controversial had the book been widely read. And of course his essay ‘‘Civil Disobedience’’ is a classic of individual- ist and antistatist thought. One might regard his cabin at Walden as a one-man ideal community. It is to be regretted that, as far as we can tell, Warren and Thoreau never met. Nevertheless, their affinities are remarkable, as they both exhibit pointedly practical activity behind which a profound idealism glows. William Batchelder Greene (b. 1819, Haverhill, Massachusetts, d. 1878): Originally a Unitarian minister under the influence of Orestes Brown- son, Greene introduced Proudhon’s ideas into American thought and developed a system of mutual banking. He was also influenced directly by Josiah Warren on such issues as money and institutional forms. Later in his life he wrote about the history of American transcenden- talism, the interpretation of the kabbalah, and a proposal for a new version of calculus. Ezra Heywood (b. 1829, Princeton, Massachusetts (?), d. 1893): After studying for the ministry, he joined up with Garrison as an abolitionist preacher in the late 1850s. After the Civil War, he plunged into labor organizing in Boston, where he met Warren. He wrote a number of pamphlets and essays treating issues of political economy from War- ren’s perspective. For decades he published the radical periodical The Word and was associated with such figures as Victoria Woodhull. With his wife, Angela, a radical feminist and a remarkable writer, he advo- cated free love and used his press to publish information on birth con- trol and other sexual issues. Thus he ran afoul of the moral crusader Anthony Comstock and was arrested and imprisoned a number of times in the 1880s. Benjamin Tucker (b. 1854, South Dartmouth, Massachusetts, d. 1939): A well-known publisher and preserver of the individualist tradition. Early on, Warren and Spooner profoundly influenced him; in later life, he was a proponent of the egoism of Max Stirner, whose remarkable 1844 book The Ego and Its Own he got translated and published in the United States. His periodical Liberty (1881–1908) published the most important libertarians and individualists of its period. Voltairine de Cleyre (b. 1866, Leslie, Michigan, d. 1912): Among American anarchists, only Thoreau rivals her as a stylist. Born into grinding pov- erty, de Cleyre was housed as a teenage girl in a nunnery, from which she emerged an atheist. Originally associated with Tucker in the indi- vidualist camp, she taught immigrants in Philadelphia and began to american individualist anarchists 267 incorporate European ideas. She was radicalized by the Haymarket riot and subsequent executions, and wrote a number of feminist es- says. Eventually she referred to herself as ‘‘an anarchist without adjec- tives,’’ and showed more and more sympathy with communist anarchists and world revolution, a` la Emma Goldman.