Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 255 11 Bellamy’s Solidarity and Its Feminist Mirror Image in Herland The American Civil War (1861-1865) marks a break between a period of practical experiences with small agricultural cooperatives, such as Brook Farm in West Roxbury, Massachusetts, which was based on transcendental- ist ideals, and an era characterized by a more politically motivated search for happiness on a national scale. The small-scale communitarian experi- ments in the United States, inspired by Emersonian transcendentalism, so- cialist utopianism, or religious millenarianism, met with adversity; most were soon dissolved. For instance, Brook Farm existed only from 1841 to 1847, and the Icarian community in Nauvoo, Illinois, which was founded by Étienne Cabet in 1849, lasted no more than ten years. The religiously inspired sectarian communities of the Shakers and the Oneida group had a longer life but remained small-scale endeavors (Kumar 1987). As men- tioned earlier, TheCommunist Manifesto had ridiculed these sporadic experi- ments as creations of a “new Jerusalem in duodecimo.” The smallest but perhaps most famous experiment was that of Henry David Thoreau, who between 1845 and 1847 lived in the woods near Walden Pond, not far from Concord, Massachusetts, and reported on his experiences in his partly fictionalized Walden (1854). Thoreau, a friend of Ralph Waldo Emerson, did not establish a community but is nevertheless commonly considered to have created one man’s eutopia. He sought the solitude of the woods, although occasionally he received visitors from near- by Concord or went himself to that town. He was a romantic individualist, a solitary mystic waiting for sublime moments of unison with nature. Most of all he wanted to be a free man, free from economic bonds and superflu- ous duties, seeking leisure and time for reading and contemplation. In his autobiographical notes the aim of individual bliss has completely eclipsed that of collective happiness. Only later did he become interested in political action. 255 Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 256 Looking Backward and the Nationalist movement The devastating war between the Unionists and the Confederates, in which more than half a million men died, had made the exigency of social organization acute. After four years of intense combat, the Union victory, which put an end to slavery throughout the country, confirmed the unity of the American nation, making the United States more nationalistic than it had been ever before. This nationalism is reflected in the work of Edward Bellamy (1850-1898), who made no attempt in his best-selling Looking Backward, 2000-1887 to insert his novel in the international tradition of utopian writing. There are no references to earlier utopian fiction, not even to Thoreau. Later American utopian writers, however, cannot avoid referring to Looking Backward, the first full-fledged and successful Ameri- can utopian narrative. Bellamy’s main sources of inspiration were the Bible, the solidarity he felt to have been characteristic of the Unionist army, and the technological progress that was boosting large-scale industrialization in the United States, whose economy recovered amazingly quickly after the end of the Civil War. (The text I will refer to is the second edition of 1888, which is more precise about the social and economic organization of the imagined America of the year 2000 than the first edition, which was published earlier that year. John L. Thomas republished the second edition with a valuable introduction in 1967.) In the novel a thin framing story can be distinguished from the utopian program that is gradually revealed by Dr. Leete to Julian West, the main character, who after more than a century awakes from his long hypnotically induced unconsciousness in the year 2000. Let me first briefly explain the improbable plot. Julian was born in Boston into a well-to-do family rich enough to allow him to pursue the pleasures and refinements of life without worrying about earning his livelihood. When the story starts he is a man of thirty who is en- gaged to Edith Bartlett, from an equally wealthy family. They are waiting for a new house, which is being built in one of the more prosperous parts of Boston. However, strikes are preventing a speedy completion of the house, and this annoyes the young couple who begin to wonder when they ever can be married. This personal setback induces the narrator to discuss the nature of strikes, the fierceness of class conflict, the fear of anarchism; in short, what is generally known as “the labor question,” for which no solu- tion is in sight. Julian and his future father-in-law seriously discuss the pos- sibility of emigration, to Greenland or Patagonia, or China even, which in 256 Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 257 the eyes of Mr. Bartlett is a model of stability since it “refused to let in our western civilization” (Bellamy 1967: 104). Julian suffers from insomnia and has asked an expert in animal magne - tism to put him to sleep in the soundproof basement of his home. However, the house is destroyed by a fire and no one realizes that Julian has survived the calamity in the basement. Remaining in a deep sleep, he is found and woken up only in 2000, still only thirty years and with all his vital functions intact. Dr. Leete attends to his awakening and serves as his host and guide in a modern eutopian Boston. Toward the end of the novel the framing story has two narrative surpris- es. The first is that Edith, the daughter of Dr. Leete and Julian’s new love interest, happens to be the great-granddaughter of his lost nineteenth-cen- tury fiancée Edith Bartlett. The second interesting ploy is that Julian in a dream imagines to be living in the old Boston of yore once again and meet- ing his old friends and acquaintances; the encounter with his mentor Dr. Leete and his family is considered to have been a dreamlike deception. Dis- illusioned with the sad look of the people in the streets and the old build- ings of nineteenth-century Boston, he feels very much depressed, which is noticed by his friends. Julian reminds them of the misery he has seen and exclaims: “I have been in Golgotha .... I have seen Humanity hanging on a cross!” (307). Reading the table of contents of a newspaper he is struck by the number of reports about fraud, embezzlement, misappropriation of a trust fund, artificial manipulation of the price of coal, wheat, and coffee, corruption among Chicago officials, fears of a business crisis, etc. The news items under the heading of foreign affairs are not optimistic either. The only moment when his gloomy mood vanishes for a while is when he sees a military parade: “Here at last were order and reason, an exhibition of what intelligent cooperation can accomplish” (304). Rather soon Julian awakes from his dream and finds himself in the twentieth century again. His stay in eutopian Boston appears to be no dream after all and is as real as his new love for Edith Leete. Different from what he had been thinking, the brief return to the nineteenth century turns out to have been a dream. The eutopian society of modern Boston has a twofold basis. On the one hand, as Dr. Leete explains, there is an “industrial army” (171, 175, etc.) which decides on the production and distribution of goods, and on the oth- er there is the high ethical principle of devotion to the commonweal. There is no contradiction between these two aspects of economic organization. The present situation in the United States, Dr. Leete argues, is the result of a long evolution during which “a set of irresponsible corporations and syn- 257 Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 258 dicates of private persons ... were intrusted to a single syndicate represent- ing the people” (127). This was in effect a nationalization of all private en- terprises. Indeed, the nation is organized as the one great business corporation in which all other corpo- rations were absorbed; it became the one capitalist in the place of all other capitalists, the sole employer, the final monopoly in which all pre- vious and lesser monopolies were swallowed up, a monopoly in the pro- fits and economies of which all citizens shared. (127) Julian assumes that the change-over from many industrial and financial en- terprises to one national business corporation would have met much resist- ance, but Leete answers that there was absolutely no violence involved. Public opinion had become ripe for it. It was a peaceful evolution, not a rev- olution. Instead of harping on the exacerbation of class conflict that in- evitably would lead to a violent revolution, as in Marxism, Bellamy empha- sizes the role of teaching the “habits of obedience, subordination, and devo- tion to duty” (171). As a student in Germany in 1868-69, Bellamy had acquired some knowl- edge of Marxist socialism (Kumar 1987), but he was more impressed by the discipline of the Prussian army. This explains why Dr. Leete can compare the economic and political system of the United States in the year 2000 to “a disciplined army under one general – such a fighting machine, for exam- ple, as the German army in the time of Von Moltke” (Bellamy 1967: 253). In his introduction, John L. Thomas writes that Bellamy as a young man had tried to be admitted to the military academy at West Point but failed to get in for health reasons. The obsession with military discipline remained a significant factor in his utopian persuasion. However, in Bellamy’s view, military discipline is based on solidarity rather than coercion. His father was a clergyman in the Baptist church and, although Edward at a young age left the church, he had not renounced the basic principles of his Christian education. Moreover, in his essay “The Re- ligion of Solidarity,” written in 1874 but not published during his lifetime, we may see traces of Emersonian transcendentalism as he postulates that there is a human instinct for perfect communion with the infinite, a psychic drive to break through the barriers of time and circumstance which prevent the individual soul from merging with the universe. (Quoted in Thomas 1967: 14) 258 Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 259 Everyone enlisted in the industrial army is supposed to subject himself vol- untarily to the discipline of the system. All working people are ranked in classes, stimulated by possible promotion and various sorts of prizes. There is only one exception to this eutopian view of labor discipline: a man able to work but persistently refusing to do so “is sentenced to solitary imprison- ment on bread and water till he consents” (Bellamy 1967: 175). However, men who are deficient in mental or bodily strength are subjected to a very lenient regime. They form a sort of invalid corps, bearing its insignia. Dr. Leete argues that in fact no one is capable of self-support, at least not for his entire life. In complex civilizations mutual dependence is the universal rule. He tells Julian West: If I were to give you, in one sentence, a key to what may seem the myste- ries of our civilization as compared with that of your age, I should say that it is the fact that the solidarity of the race and the brotherhood of man, which to you were but fine phrases, are, to our thinking and feeling, ties as real and as vital as physical fraternity. (179) This appeal to the solidarity of humankind makes it difficult to reject Bel- lamy’s utopianism offhandedly on the ground of its ostensibly military in- spiration. As we shall see, in the reception of his novel two camps can be eas- ily distinguished, one praising the ethical basis of his eutopia and the other criticizing its mistaken interpretation of a military organization. Looking Backward discusses various details of the economic system of the year 2000. All citizens are employees of the nation and have the duty to work in the industrial army for 24 years, from the age of 21 to 45. After that period one is free to seek intellectual and spiritual enjoyment or other forms of recreation. During their apprenticeship these workers find out what kind of job they can do well. The allocation of work to everyone is not described as a difficult process nor is it painful for the individuals con- cerned – quite unlike the real practices and experiences in later Communist states. There are no merchants and no bankers, and money has been re- placed by a credit-card system. As in More’s Utopia, gold has no particular value. Everyone receives the same remuneration for his or her work, what- ever it is, for “all men who do their best, do the same” (152). Personal prop- erty is allowed on a limited scale and it can even be inherited, but the nation remains the sole capitalist and landowner. Commodities can be ordered at shopping centers that host sample stores where various articles can be in- spected; the city’s central warehouse will home-deliver the ordered goods. 259 Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 260 Bellamy emphasizes the positive role of technological progress in ban- ning any scarcity. There is electric light and heating. At home one may lis- ten to music broadcast over the telephone. In the same way Julian listens to a sermon of Mr. Barton which takes up twelve pages of the novel. As in Vera’s dream in What Is to Be Done?, social life is concentrated in large pub- lic dining halls, though it is also possible to book a small room in the same building to have dinner with one or more guests, as Dr. Leete does when he invites Julian to have a meal together with Edith and Mrs. Leete. Men and women are equal but the differences between the sexes are not ignored. As in many utopias, passionate attraction between men and women is looked down upon. What Julian admired in Edith Leete is her “serene frankness and ingenuous directness, more like that of a noble and innocent boy than any girl I had ever known” (262). Women are members of the industrial army, but since they are “inferior in strength to men and further disqualified industrially in special ways” (263), they have a sort of autonomous organization within the industrial army with a woman gener- al-in-chief and an “exclusively feminine regime” (264). The political system is meritocratic and corporatist. It is organized ac- cording to guilds or professions, each headed by the general of the guild. They cooperate in ten great departments or groups of allied trades. The of- ficers heading these departments form a council chaired by a general-in- chief who is also the president of the United States. A person can rise to that high position through a combination of appointment and suffrage. The general of a guild, for instance, is chosen from among the superintend- ents by vote of the retired members of the guild. The president of the Unit- ed States is similarly chosen from among the heads of the ten departments by retired members of the industrial army over 45 years of age. The system, which has neither parties nor politicians, is not restricted to the United States. The European nations, Australia, Mexico, and parts of South Amer- ica have been remodeled likewise. These countries form a federal union. An international council regulates mutual relations and commerce as well as a joint policy toward “the more backward races, which are gradually be- ing educated up to civilized institutions” (184). In an attempt to appease those who would object to the lack of individual freedom in the eutopia of the year 2000, Dr. Leete argues that “our system is elastic enough to give free play to every instinct of human nature which does not aim at dominating others or living on the fruit of others’ labor” (204). This sounds promising but, apart from writers, artists, medical doc- tors, and teachers, who can be exempted from the general rule of service in 260 Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 261 the industrial army, no able-bodied man between 21 and 33 of age can avoid his share of work. After twelve years of service he can obtain dis- charge from the industrial army, provided he accepts for the rest of his life only half of the rate of maintenance other citizens receive, which means that on balance there are only twelve years of compulsory service. Whether this will satisfy those who are critical of the coercive aspects of Bellamy’s system is doubtful. The treatment of literature in eutopias is often a reliable criterion for judging the relation between personal and collective happiness. Dr. Leete’s library contains volumes of Shakespeare, Hawthorne, and Dickens. Unlike Mercier, Bellamy does not mention any censorship of literary works. How- ever, the reasons why certain writers of the past still are being read sound rather simplistic. Dickens, for instance, is admired because “his great heart beat for the poor” (191). When Julian is asked to read the story “Penthesil- ia” by Berrian – a famous writer in eutopian Boston – he is struck by the ab- sence in the story of “all effects drawn from the contrasts of wealth and poverty, education and ignorance, coarseness and refinement, high and low, all motives drawn from social pride and ambition, the desire of being richer or the fear of being poorer, together with sordid anxieties of any sort for one’s self or others” (204-205). “Penthesilia,” which must have been modeled after the story of Achilles who, according to one tradition, killed the queen of the Amazons on the battlefield near Troy and fell in love with her when he removed her helmet and saw her dying, is reduced to a ro- mance of “love galore”: love “unfretted by artificial barriers created by dif- ferences of station or possessions, owning no other law but that of the heart” (205). Julian believes that “Penthesilia,” more than Dr. Leete’s scat- tered explanations, gives him “a general impression of the social aspect of the twentieth century” (205), a view which appears rather incredible, unless Berrian’s romance, whose text unfortunately is not shared with the reader, deviates completely from the traditional myth of the interlacement of eros and thanatos and has smoothed out the sharper edges of human existence. No, a coherent view of the social aspect of the eutopia of the year 2000 is not provided by literature but by a conversion to the religion of solidarity. Looking Backward contains several references to the Bible, culminating in Mr. Barton’s sermon, whose main theme is human brotherhood and soli- darity. The preacher argues that “the ten commandments became well- nigh obsolete in a world where there was no temptation to theft” (282). The ideals of liberty, equality, and fraternity have been realized, he sug- gests. The sermon offers a splendid mystical perspective: 261 Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 262 The way stretches far before us, but the end is lost in light. For twofold is the return of man to God “who is our home,” the return of the individual by the way of death, and the return of the race by the fulfilment of the evolution, when the divine secret hidden in the germ shall be perfectly unfolded. (285) Note again the word “evolution” in this crucial passage, with which Bel- lamy explicitly departs from the necessity of a violent revolution. Bellamy’s eutopia may in various respects be called socialist, but he hated the conno- tation of labor conflict or class struggle of that term, and chose instead “na- tionalism” as the name for his eutopian ideology. At the same time he dis- tanced himself from Marx as well as from European dissension. In view of the enormous popularity of his book, it is not farfetched to assume that his intervention in the ideological and political debate made the United States forever suspicious of Marxist socialism and its antireligious bias. In some way, Looking Backward epitomizes American culture, which is deeply root- ed in a kind of ecumenical Christian belief, is more nationalistic than it at first sight seems to be, and has little sympathy for European diversity. Dr. Leete explains the idea of organicist nationalism as follows: It was not till a rearrangement of the industrial and social system on a high - er ethical basis, and for the more efficient production of wealth, was rec - ognized as the interest, not of one class, but equally of all classes, of rich and poor, cultured and ignorant, old and young, weak and strong, men and women, that there was any prospect that it would be achieved. Then the national party arose to carry it out by political methods. It probably took that name because its aim was to nationalize the functions of produc- tion and distribution. Indeed, it could not well have had any other name, for its purpose was to realize the idea of the nation with a grandeur and completeness never before conceived, not as an association of men for cer- tain merely political functions affecting their happiness only remotely and superficially, but as a family, a vital union, a common life, a mighty heaven- touching tree whose leaves are it people, fed from its veins, and feeding it in turn. (260-261) Bellamy’s novel was an enormous success. Within a year of its publication, Looking Backward had sold more than a quarter of a million copies; within ten years it had sold half a million copies in the United States and hundreds of thousands throughout the world. The book was translated into all major 262 Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 263 languages. In Russia, for instance, seven different translations were pub- lished before 1917 (Kumar 1987). In 1935 the Publishers Weeklymentioned Looking Backward as one of the four most influential works published since 1885, the other three being Das Kapital, The Golden Bough, and The Decline of the West (Fortunati and Trousson 2000: 360). In the autumn of 1888 the first Bellamy Club was formed in Boston with the purpose of spreading the message of Nationalism. In particular former military men supported Bel- lamy’s ideas. By 1890 about five hundred of such clubs had been established throughout the country (Thomas 1967). In 1897, one year before his death, Bellamy published Equality, a sequel to Looking Backward which, however, never reached the popularity of the original work. Motivated by the response to Looking Backward, Bellamy gradually be- came involved in politics, arguing that Nationalism, with its emphasis on economic equality, was the logical complement of the political equality promised in the preamble to the American Declaration of Independence of 1776. In this way he managed to connect his idea of economic equality with a glorious American past. This certainly accounts for part of the success of the Nationalist movement. In a political sense, things became more con- crete when in 1892 Bellamy advised sympathizers of the Nationalist move- ment to vote for the presidential candidate of the People’s Party, General James Baird Weaver, a Civil War veteran. Though the People’s Party was much less ambitious than the Nationalists were, Bellamy evidently saw a chance to realize at least part of his utopian ideals. However, Weaver car- ried only six states with twenty-two electoral votes (Thomas 1967). The eu- topian society of the year 2000 remained a fictional utopia. Of the many commentaries and critiques of Looking Backward that have been written, I will briefly discuss three rather significant ones only, those of General Francis A. Walker, William Morris, and John Dewey. General Walker, a man who, after his military career, became a professor of political economy and president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, pub- lished a critique of Bellamy’s book in the Atlantic Monthly of February 1890. In it he posited that Bellamy held a wrong notion of military discipline and was mistaken in believing that it could be used to help to develop the Amer- ican economy. He suspected that Bellamy did not turn to the military sys- tem of organization because he was a socialist, but rather became a socialist “because he had been moon-struck with a fancy for the military organiza- tion and discipline itself” (Thomas 1967: 75). Of course, Bellamy was hurt by this attack which was not completely ill-founded. In his defense he shift- ed to emphasizing civilian cooperation as in the civil service and the neces- 263 Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 264 sity to nationalize telephone companies, railroads, mines, and the produc- tion and distribution of electricity. The workers involved in these branches of industry would, together with the civil servants, constitute the core of the industrial army that would profit from steady employment, fixed work- ing hours, and social insurances. In this way, as John L. Thomas observed, Bellamy retreated to some extent from the military model of organization. Half a year earlier, in June 1889, William Morris had published a review of Looking Backward in The Commonweal. The argument was equally nega- tive as Walker’s but far more subtle. Rather pertinently, Morris ventured that “the only safe way of reading a Utopia is to consider it as the expression of the temperament of its author” (William Morris 1936: 502); this applies not only to Looking Backward, but, I would suggest, also to News from Nowhere, or later utopias and dystopias, such as those by Wells, Orwell, or Huxley. Bellamy’s temperament is “unhistoric and unartistic” (502), Mor- ris writes, whereas that of himself, I assume, expresses the vision of an aes- thete and artist. Their views of utopia are completely incompatible. Morris holds against Bellamy that he focuses on the regimentation of economic or- ganization, on the “mere machinery of life,” whereas he himself would rather think “that true life implies free and equal life” (503-504). He casti- gates the idea of a sharp division between a period of work until the age of 45 followed by a time of recreation and cultural development after retire- ment. Instead, he believes that “the true incentive to useful and happy labour is and must be pleasure in the work itself” (506). In contradistinction to Bellamy’s notion of national centralization, Morris holds that it will be necessary for the unit of administration to be small enough for every citizen to feel himself responsible for its details, and be interested in them; that individual men cannot shuffle off the business of life on to the shoulders of an abstraction called the State, but must deal with it in con - scious association with each other: ... that art, using that word in its widest and due signification, is not a mere adjunct of life which free and happy men can do without, but the necessary expression and indispensable in - strument of human happiness. (506-507) The quintessence of Morris’s utopia can be characterized as: freedom, vari- ety, and “small is beautiful.” He focuses on individual experience rather than on collective stability. With Bellamy it is the other way round. Writing almost half a century later, John Dewey, the Columbia Universi- ty philosopher and psychologist who lectured in China for more than two 264 Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 265 years during the heyday of the May Fourth Movement and was widely known in China as well as elsewhere (Chow Tse-tsung 1960), published a more favorable appraisal of Looking Backward, crediting Bellamy with hav- ing seen the undesirable social consequences of an unequal distribution of material goods. Under the title “A Great American Prophet,” published in Common Sense of April 1934, Dewey wrote: Bellamy’s communism rests on an ethical basis rather than upon a view that is sometimes called “scientific” because of its abstraction from consi- derations of human well-being. But his ethical principle always takes cog- nizance of the dependence of human life and its supreme values upon equal access to and control over material things. (Quoted in Thomas 1967: 87-88) From a certain historical distance it appears that Bellamy’s dependence on the model of military organization has faded, whereas his arraignment of the unregulated capitalist system stands out more clearly than ever. Despite some attempts in Europe and elsewhere to reduce differences in income, Bellamy’s analysis of rampant capitalism is as valid now as it was in his own or Dewey’s day. However, the perfect society that he designed as an alterna- tive has so far remained truly utopian. Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s Herland The novel Herland (1915) by Charlotte Perkins Gilman is one of the many imitations of Looking Backward, but it has attracted particular attention since it sketches a utopia populated only by women. As such it can be read as a female complement to Bellamy’s predominantly masculine eutopia. Gilman read Looking Backward soon after its publication and, as Denise D. Knight writes in her introduction to Herland, “became a convert to Nation- alism” (Knight 1999: xi). Gilman was impressed by Bellamy’s emphasis on the equality of men and women, while still recognizing the differences be- tween the sexes. Gilman was particularly attracted by the idea of the eco- nomic independence of women and the restriction of household duties. Her biography may explain why she insisted so much on women’s rights. Morris’s suggestion that every utopia can be read as the expression of the temperament of its author applies to Herland as well. Charlotte Perkins Gilman (1860-1935) had a difficult childhood. When 265 Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 266 her father, Frederic Perkins, abandoned the family, her mother Mary, a part-time teacher, had to raise two children on her own. As an adolescent Charlotte rejected the conventional roles of married women. She studied drawing and painting at the Rhode Island School of Design. In 1882 she met Charles Stetson, an artist who proposed marriage to her. Charlotte de- clined as she feared that being married would interfere with her wish to work and devote her life to public service. In a letter to Stetson she wrote: “I am meant to be useful & strong, to help many and do my share in the world’s work, but not to be loved” (quoted in Knight 1999: x). However, Stetson persisted and at last they were married in 1884. Within a year a daughter was born, after which Charlotte sank in a deep depression. A neu- rologist prescribed that she should have the baby with her at all times and forget about any other ambition, but the advice was counterproductive and led to having a nervous breakdown. In the fall of 1887 the couple agreed to separate. The next year Charlotte left with her daughter Katherine for Cal- ifornia, where she began writing and lecturing about the marginalized sta- tus of women. This was the time when she read Looking Backward. However, Charlotte found it increasingly difficult to combine her stren- uous work with the education of her daughter. When Katherine was nine years old, Charlotte took the painful decision to relinquish custody of her daughter to Stetson, whom she divorced in 1894. Of course, she was criti- cized for this decision by her detractors, who considered her an “unnatural mother” (xi). But Charlotte had her own ideas about raising children, which crystalized into the notion of “social motherhood,” later elaborated in her various essays as well as in Herland. It implied that child-care profes- sionals would be involved in the raising and education of children, and also that some mothers would take care not only of their own children but also those of others. The publication of her feminist treatise Women and Econom- ics (1898), which argues for the economic independence of women, made her an “authority on the relationship between female sexual oppression and economic dependence on men” (xi). In 1900Charlotte Perkins married the attorney George Gilman and moved to New York, where she continued to write and lecture. In 1909 she launched the Forerunner, a monthly maga- zine in which her utopian narrative Herlandwas serialized in 1915. Herland is indeed a utopia, an isolated country which, for the past two thousand years, has been populated by women who love “one another with a practically universal affection” and is a “very practical little heaven” (Gilman 1999: 95), characterized by untroubled peace, unmeasured plenty, and steady health. It is a country where “the drama, dance, music, religion, 266 Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 267 and education were all very close together” (100), where children from their first memory knew “Peace, Beauty, Order, Safety, Love, Wisdom, Jus- tice, Patience, and Plenty” (101), and where babies “never cried” (103). Of course, the utopian country where only women live, about three mil- lion of them, is difficult to access. The story is told by a first-person narra- tor, the sociologist Van Jennings, who reports on his visit to Herland, where he had stayed for more than a year in the company of his two com- panions: Terry, a rich explorer with a strong sense of masculine pride, and the more feminine Jeff, who is an admirer of everything women do. The three men, all from the United States, were participating in a large scientif- ic expedition to a barely explored wilderness when savages told them about a dangerous country beyond the mountains where no man lived. The three friends decided to return to this place in order to discover and explore that strange country. Some time later the three men undertake the journey by boat and using a small aircraft they fly over the country – not larger than Holland – seeing indeed only women, and no men and no cattle. Landing their plane, they walk through the woods in the direction of a village. Finally, they meet the women, who at first had hidden themselves among the large trees. The three friends make acquaintance with Celis, Alima, and Ellador, but any further contact is difficult. Terry offers them a necklace of colorful stones and Alima is courageous enough to snatch it from his hands: “Her interest was more that of an intent boy playing a fascinating game than of a girl lured by an ornament” (18) – which is reminiscent of Julian’s characteriza- tion of Edith Leete as “a noble and innocent boy,” quoted above. The women of Herland are described as dispassionate and, because of the ab- sence of men, unaware of the possibility of sexual attraction. It is different with the three men. In particular, Terry hopes to select a beautiful woman and have a good time with her, but the women who confront them in the vil- lage are all elderly, and look like “old Colonels” (22). Gilman here criticizes the typically male cliché that women should always be young and charming. The men dislike being surrounded by the athletic and strong (but asexual) women, and Terry pulls his revolver and fires it in the air. The result is that each of the three men is seized by several women and is anesthetized by means of a wetted cloth held before his mouth and nose. From now on the men are prisoners, and they are kept under constant surveillance, compelled to learn the language as well as the customs of the country, and interrogated about the situation in the outer world. The women learn of the inequality, contagious diseases, wide-spread ignorance, 267 Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 268 prejudices and unbridled emotion to be found there and conclude that the other world is not superior and that the three men can only be allowed to return to their own country if they will not disclose the location of Herland, which wants to maintain its splendid isolation and not be intruded upon by more foreigners. Van departs with his wife Ellador, Terry must choose be- tween lifelong imprisonment and the firm promise never to return or to show others the way to Herland, but Jeff, married to Celis, decides to stay in this female eutopia. It is of course rather improbable that in the age of increasing air traffic Herland could hope to remain hidden from the outside world for long. The utopia depicted in Herland remains a fictional one enlaced by a num- ber of stories to make it appear as reasonable and credible as possible. One of these stories is about the historical origin of the country, another about the asexual begetting of children (who all happen to be daughters). Other stories concern the high technological development of the country and ob- servations on education and religion, but I will mainly focus on the history of the country as told to the three men and the particulars of “parthenogen- esis” (83). Originally, about two thousand years ago, the country had access to the sea and was in contact with other civilizations. It had ships, an army, and a king, and the people were heterosexual and polygamous and held slaves. They engaged in wars with neighboring people but one time, when the army was defending the one mountain pass that connected the country with the outer world, a volcano erupted, filled in the pass, and killed most of the men fighting there. The slaves made use of the opportunity to free themselves and kill the few remaining masters and all young boys. They hoped to take possession of the land and of the remaining women. These, however, rose in sheer desperation and killed their conquerors. In this way the population of the country came to consist of women only. Of course, the women worried about procreation, but unexpectedly, af- ter about ten years, as a result of a “Supreme Desire, the overmastering de- mand for a child” (138), one of the young women became pregnant and bore a child without having been impregnated. This was interpreted as “a direct gift from the gods” (57) and the proud mother was placed in the Tem- ple of Maaia, the goddess of motherhood. The allusion to the immaculate conception of Mary is clear, and is moreover made explicit when on anoth- er occasion Ellador hears about “the Virgin birth” in the Christian tradi- tion and shows no surprise at all (109). (However, the civilization of Her- land shows no other traces of having Christian beliefs. It is a predominantly 268 Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 269 secular culture based on the idea of evolution, as in Looking Backward.) Bio- logically, parthenogenesis, or the development of an unfertilized gamete, is not impossible and occurs among certain insects, such as the Mycocepurus smithii, an ant observed in various parts of Latin America. A modern variant of this form of reproduction of living organisms is cloning. (It is a major theme in Houellebecq’s La Possibilité d’une île, which I will discuss in a later chapter.) The woman in the Temple of Maaia gave birth to four more daughters and when the girls had grown up they appeared to have the same faculty of parthenogenetic procreation, and so had their daughters and granddaugh- ters. These women revered their original mother as a “Queen-Priestess” (59), and in the course of centuries they forgot about the gods and goddess- es of antiquity and worshipped only their mother goddess. Their religion developed into a kind of “Maternal Pantheism” (61), which was rational, distrusted any revealed truth, and rejected notions of hell or other “horri- ble ideas” (110). To these women, “God is a Pervading Power, ... an In- dwelling Spirit, something inside of us that we want more of” (112): All their wide mutual love, all the subtle interplay of mutual friendship and service, the urge of progressive thought and invention, the deepest religious emotion, every feeling and every act was related to this great central Power, to the River of Life pouring through them, which made them the bearers of the very Spirit of God. (138) The echo of Emerson, either by way of Bellamy or more directly, can be recognized here. Ellador, who in a dialogue with Van Jennings explains their religion, is disgusted by the Christian idea of eternal life after death. In Herland the idea of continuing life is projected onto the younger genera- tions, those of the children and the children’s children. Motherhood stands at the center of their worldly religion, which favors birth control in order to prevent overpopulation and improvement of the race by dissuading “those held unfit” to become pregnant and encouraging others to bear more than one child. Motherhood is “the highest Social Service,” even “a Sacrament” (70). In chapter six, the religion of motherhood is compared with the reli- gion of solidarity and brotherhood, but Bellamy’s name is not mentioned. Gilman does not make parthenogenesis the condition of a perfect socie- ty. At the end of the story, Van marries Ellador, and Jeff takes Celis as his wife. Alima becomes the bride of Terry, but this turns out to be an unsuit- able alliance and when he tries “to force her to love him as her master” 269 Perfect worlds_bw 05-08-11 14:18 Pagina 270 (140), she calls her friend Moadine and together they truss him up in no time. Macho behavior is not appreciated in Herland, but if love is unselfish, more agape than eros, a couple can experience the most supreme satisfac- tion. The women in Herland are convinced that dual parentage is a “Great New Hope” (137). When Celis announces that she is pregnant and Jeff is the father, she is celebrated as an example of “the New Motherhood” and honored all over the country. There is some hope that the best customs of Herland can be joined with the best traditions of the outer world. However, the distance between the personal experiences of well-being and contentment in the world outside and the collective happiness among the Herlanders, who have no equivalent for the words “family” or “home” (95), is great. Literature can again serve as a yardstick. Gilman follows Bel- lamy rather closely in writing that certain motives simply do not occur in their literary writings: “they lacked the sex motive and, with it, jealousy. They had no interplay of warring nations, no aristocracy and its ambitions, no wealth and poverty opposition” (100). The narrator concludes that there is no dramatic tension in their writings, but the Herlanders have a highly developed and subtle child literature. The problem of how to write interesting fiction in a eutopian society appears again to be a difficult one. Herland may be the expression of a woman who felt marginalized, but this utopian novel expresses a rather optimistic view of the world. Gilman hopes that the real world will learn from her eutopian community which is the result of a long, carefully steered evolution. Gilman shares her admira- tion for Darwin and Emerson with Bellamy, but diverges from him by in- sisting more forcefully on the equality of women and men – an equality that is approached and discussed from a position in which female values pre- dominate. 270