Introduction The Planetary Condition Amy J. Elias and Christian Moraru As its title suggests, this essay collection attends to the planetary turn in contem- porary criticism and theory. Like other critical “turns” before it— postcolonial, postmodern, or global— the shift under scrutiny here concerns artists’ and critics’ new speculations about our world, one which seems to be outgrowing modernity’s reigning sociological, aesthetic, and political- economic systems. Less and less relevant to the twenty- first century, modern paradigms appear increasingly unable to predict, let alone adequately explain, the global opera- tions of technologically enhanced finance capital, cosmopolitanism’s struggle to reinvent itself from the ashes of post-e mpire Europe, and the risk envi- ronment brought about by the ever-e scalating crises of world ecologies.1 A reaction to the multiple and steadily widening inconsistency between what the world is becoming and how this change registers in prevalent epistemologies and cultural histories, the critical- theoretical model of planetarity attempts a move away from the totalizing paradigm of modern-a ge globalization— and thus a critique or critical “completion” of globalism— as well as from the irony and hermeneutics of suspicion typical of what came to be known as postmodernism. The postmodern has always been a fraught and unsatis- factory analytical category also because, as Guy Debord, Jean Baudrillard, Fredric Jameson, and David Harvey have maintained, it never severed its com- promising ties to late socio-a esthetic modernity, market globalization, and the society of spectacle, simulation, and empty pastiche. Little surprise, then, that, on many fronts today, postmodernism is being relinquished as a dessicated— itself “exhausted”—d escriptor of the social macrocosm and world art.2 The discourse of planetarity presents itself, in response to the twenty-fi rst- c entury world and to the decreasing ability of the postmodern theoretical apparatus to account for it, as a new structure of awareness, as a methodi- cal receptivity to the geothematics of planetariness characteristic of a fast-e xpanding series of cultural formations. Admittedly transitional, “fuzzy,” and frustratingly amorphous at times, these formations nevertheless seem to indicate that there has been a paradigmatic translation of world cultures into a planetary setup in which globalization’s homogenizing, one- becoming xi xii Amy J. Elias and Christian Moraru pulsion is challenged by relationality, namely, by an ethicization of the ecumenic process of coming together or “worlding.” That is to say, while unfolding within the same historical moment as globalization, planetarity is configured— artistically, philosophically, and intellectually—f rom a different angle and goes in another direction. It represents a transcultural phenom- enon whose economical and political underpinnings cannot be ignored but whose preeminent thrust is ethical. Synonymous, in a sense, with what Ulrich Beck and Edgar Grande have termed “second modernity,” planetarity advances on a plurality of modern- ization paths, Western and non- Western, “tak[ing] the varieties of modernity and their global interdependencies as a starting point for theoretical reflec- tion and empirical research.”3 In this emerging worldview and critical theory, the planet as a living organism, as a shared ecology, and as an incrementally integrated system both embracing and rechanneling the currents of moder- nity is the axial dimension in which writers and artists perceive themselves, their histories, and their aesthetic practices. Insufficiently systematic so far, planetarity has yet to reach critical mass culturally and stylistically. As such, it has not yet given birth to a well-d efined world culture or to a coherent model of relational localisms that might make up this kind of geocultural conglomerate. We submit, however, that the burgeoning critical conversa- tion around planetarity is leading to a better and better marked, more and more consequential set of thematic, discursive, and cultural protocols. Nei- ther entirely new nor everywhere identical in terms of its meaning, material embodiment, and effects, planetary geoculture looks to be a powerful albeit nascent paradigm, leaving its daily imprint on how people imagine them- selves and the world in the third millennium. Our project rests on two principal, intertwined claims. First, planetar- ity as the location and formal operator of culture must be given pride of place by any rigorous, historically minded effort to come to grips with con- temporary representation in general and the arts in particular: the world rise of the bioconnective is the present- day event horizon. Thus, planetar- ity should be distinguished from other, coterminous approaches connoting similarly ecumenic aesthetics and relational scenarios such as “globaliza- tion” and “cosmopolitanism.” Second, if today’s planetary life consists in an incessantly thickening, historically unprecedented web of relations among people, cultures, and locales, to comprehend the planetary must entail grasp- ing the relationality embedded in it. Consequently, relatedness, dialogue, and interactivity are central to major aesthetic initiatives stirring at this stage in world history. Indeed, clusters of problems are coalescing in the twenty- first- century literary and visual arts around social connection, language translation, cultural exchange, trafficking, cross- border mobility, and other forms of “self- other” interplay. If planetarity is the cultural- discursive matrix of innovative art, then the dialogical and the relational may well encapsulate the planetary aesthetic. Introduction xiii Globalization and Planetarity As a concept, “globalization” might be understood as a world vision, an economic trajectory, a thematic- stylistic repertoire, and a scholarly focus. It designates a highly complex category and array of concerns. Its planetary coun- terparts, “planetarization” and “planetarity,” seem concurrently symbiotic and oppositional concepts insofar as they assume, for many commentators, the equivocal status of global studies offshoots.4 Globalization, however, may be a fundamentally different animal. Its meaning spans three main semantic zones— internationalization, multinationalism, and transnationalism— each with its specific implications for political, environmental, and ethical global organization.5 Thus, Nick Bisley interprets globalization as “the set of social consequences which derive from the increasing rate and speed of interac- tions of knowledge, people, goods and capital between states and societies.”6 His definition falls under the purview of sociology and economics, but the debate about globalization roams across an astoundingly wide panoply of discourses and disciplinary- historical perspectives. Given such a range, even the modern origins of globalization are contested. There are, for instance, those who take a “long view” of the phenomenon as well as those who place its beginnings closer to our time. Certain critics claim that the networks of intercultural contact originated with the seventh- and eighth- century spread of Islam throughout the Middle East, Asia, and Africa; others point to mer- cantilist Europe and early multinational corporations such as the Dutch East India Company; and still others situate globalization’s “golden age” in nineteenth- century colonialism and in the international politics ushered in by industrial- era imperialism. Lopsided, scarcely affecting all people and places with the same force or in the same fashion, its benefits darkly ambiguous and unevenly distributed, globalization, some historians contend, has been in full swing for a while now, if not for ages. The longue durée methodology of a number of authors influenced by the French Annales school merges these approaches, stressing that modernity had been globalizing since the late medieval period and only became manifestly global after World War II. These critics’ broad- compass tack sweeps across whole geographical and geopolitical zones (countries, regions, continents) and historical periods (centuries, epochs). Holding sway inside this camp is Immanuel Wallerstein’s “world- systems” theory. In Wallerstein’s work, how- ever, the world- system and the global are initially not equivalent; they would become so only in the nineteenth century. Modeled on Fernand Braudel’s “Mediterranean world,” the “world- system” may have “originated in Europe in the sixteenth century,” Wallerstein ventures in Geopolitics and Geoculture, but it reached a truly global level hundreds of years later, following several globalizing stages.7 Likewise, the economic theory of Giovanni Arrighi is cen- tered in systems analysis and posits a 700-y ear period of development of capital. In this account, the genealogy of capitalism as a succession of “long xiv Amy J. Elias and Christian Moraru centuries” privileges certain nations and leads ultimately to the current world hegemony of the United States.8 Wallerstein and Arrighi both postulate the existence of transhistorical systemic aggregates underlain by capital flows largely indifferent to the actions of human individuals and groups. For both writers and those influenced by their conclusions, political events such as the end of Word War II or of the Cold War do not change the trajectory of the world system but rather serve its developmental purposes. There are, of course, those who “believe that globalization is a myth, or that, at any rate, it is much exaggerated as a distinctively new phenomenon.”9 Supporting this notion are critics who contest what they see as a Eurocentric bias in many globalization models, namely, an alignment of this historical process with Western modernity and, subsequently, an assumption that the globalizing system functions uniformly and on a world scale.10 Authors such as Martin Albrow, however, reason that in order for globalization to have any meaning for current economic, social, and cultural systems, we must look for it solely within industrial and post- industrial capitalism.11 Along the same lines, voices in critical theory, globalization studies, and cognate fields are keen to underline the more recent events leading to a qualitatively new, twenty- first- century globalization. In cultural history and anthropology, for example, many consider the tearing down of the Berlin Wall a watershed in the narrative of globalization. To critics such as Christian Moraru, 1989 is what “mondialization” historian Jean-P ierre Warnier would call une année charnière: a “hinge year” opening a historical door onto “thick” or late glo- balization.12 That year, we are told, set off the later phase of a momentous shift from a “cubicular” world— Pierre Chaunu’s univers cloisonné— to one expe- rienced and conceptualized as an incrementally all-p ervasive “network.”13 From this standpoint, the Cold War world was a “soft,” quintessentially bipolar system, loosely if counterintuitively held together by an antagonist- separatist template whose keystone was the nation- state, with “division” the logic of the Cold War-e ra geopolitical dispositif. Accordingly, territory was parceled out worldwide into walled-i n “influence zones” balancing each other and functioning centripetally under the jurisdiction of relatively sta- ble and recognized political centers. Underwritten and kept in place by its mutually “deterring” antinomies of power, “common markets,” pacts, and treaties, that world ended, some say, in 1991. The one to come, neoliberal institutions and pundits were eager to assure us, would close economic gaps between rich and poor and heal humanity’s historical wounds. Immediately following the fall of the Berlin Wall, it seemed that the new world— or at least the new European-N orth American world— had a modicum of hope for a post- conflictual state of global affairs. Echoing Woodrow Wilson’s 1918 “new world” speech, sweeping, “new world order” pronouncements made by Mikhail Gorbachev and George H. W. Bush fueled that optimism. But this rhetoric was soon to be punctured by cultural theorists who had grown suspicious of the international political consensus on the putatively Introduction xv universal economic gains of globalization. A case in point, Ken Jowitt wrote of a “new world disorder” and was followed in his apprehensiveness of post– Cold War sanguinity by Zygmunt Bauman, Tzvetan Todorov, Amin Maalouf, Wallerstein, and other chroniclers of “le Nouveau Désordre mondial.” Con- cerned less with the Cold War, Joseph Stiglitz mounted a devastating critique of economic globalization, while Zilla Eisenstein and others laid the disen- franchisement of women and non- white, non- European peoples at the door of globalization’s “philosophy,” neoliberalism.14 These critics painted pictures of a hopelessly entropic, world-s cale pandemonium triggered by the liquefy- ing of Cold War binaries and by the triumph of neoliberal economics seeping across continents and world financial markets. Their jeremiads outlined how, in a “planetar[ily] diasphor[ic]” age, autopoietic world- systems were bound to bypass human agency and meaningful planning altogether.15 Before long, such critical exercises in catastrophism were joined by what would amount to a post- 1990 flood of more applied and patiently documented analyses of “globalization,” “globalism,” and the “global age.” As a result, contempo- rary theory underwent a “global turn” comparable to the paradigm-c hanging “turns” of decades past.16 Breaks other than the end of the Cold War were offered as equally plausible causes of globalization’s acceleration, with the Al- Qaeda attacks on New York’s World Trade Center and the Pentagon as main contenders.17 A Lacanian psychosocial examination of the same his- torical interval led Phillip E. Wegner, for example, to the conclusion that September 11, 2001, reenacted the earlier crumbling of the Berlin Wall and, more generally, that the Cold War actually ended only with 9/11 and the establishment of a twenty- first- century “New World Order.”18 Media and technology theorists put forth a rather different perspective. Less interested in periodization, they zeroed in on cultural shifts, claiming that the decisive impetus of globalization was not a political occurrence— such as the demolition of the Berlin Wall or the fall of the Twin Towers— but the advent of wide- reaching communication technologies, including the Internet. Media studies have long examined how film, television, music, and other mediatic forms cross borders and transform cultural landscapes on a vast scale.19 Epistemic or even ideologically colored political shifts are them- selves viewed as indebted to technological advancements and networked media. In works by McKenzie Wark, Paul Virilio, Douglas Kellner, Richard Grusin, and others, the determining factor leading to new types of global- ization is the forging of cross-n ational communication networks through affordable and transportable digital technologies.20 In the most optimistic accounts, popular protest movements and even political revolution are seen as enabled by media or by newer technological communication networks. Manuel Castells, for example, has written that burgeoning democracy move- ments throughout the world are deeply indebted to international social networking systems, while Jennifer Earl and Katrina Kimport’s work (mim- icking studies of transnational advocacy networks in traditionally configured xvi Amy J. Elias and Christian Moraru organizations) exemplifies analysis that investigates how World Wide Web affordances enable Web activism that crosses national boundaries and class lines.21 Similarly, popular authors such as Pico Iyer and Thomas L. Fried- man tell “global stories” featuring extensively, if somewhat euphorically, the technologically enhanced milieux of transnational travel and the political “flatness” of a world within the purview of capital.22 The globalization accounts supplied by writers like Iyer and Friedman beg a number of questions. For even if statistics on population migration, data dissemination, goods and services transfer, and communications’ internation- alization were readily available, reliable, and easy to work into a cohesive theory of globalization, conclusions about globalizing trends drawn by polit- ical economists would still not necessarily match those by cultural theorists grappling with issues of identity and the cultural productions expressing it. As differentiated benefits accrue to different constituencies across the globe, there is meager consensus today about the advantages and disadvantages of globalization. Nor do all scholars agree on where we are right now in its history. Is globalization accelerating, some ask? Has it peaked? Is it perhaps now mutating into novel forms of local / global organization? If so, then what about the rising, trans- statal “jurisdictional geographies” and their bearings on the leverage, sovereignty, and overall significance of the nation- state?23 And, again, what is the role of culture, art, and their reception and interpre- tation in the new geopolitical context? In a recent review, Albrow succinctly formulates the questions that remain unanswered in globalization debates. “In a democratic nation-s tate,” he notes, “we accept the legitimacy of laws and regulations and demand that those responsible for their creation and for their implementation should be publicly accountable. But who are the authorities in global governance? And how can we, now a ‘global public,’ have any part in the process or exercise any kind of democratic control?”24 What Albrow underscores is globalization theory’s central critical struggle, and, we would add, overall failure to come to terms with issues of political control and technical administration in a developing world monoculture in which fewer and fewer are at home. Planetary studies responds to these concerns and shortcomings in sev- eral ways, two of which are worth highlighting here not only because they carry more weight but also because they intersect with the anti- postmodern— and “post- postmodernizing”— reaction delineated earlier. Chiefly eco- cosmological, the first advocates an urgent conceptual shift away from globalization to “worlding”—o r more precisely, from globe as financial- technocratic system toward planet as world- ecology. This reorien- tation calls for significant changes in perspective, which should eventually lead, we believe, to notably different outcomes in and for the world. Directly and indirectly, such a repositioning was influenced by the growth of environ- mental movements and ecocritical analysis throughout the twentieth century, especially in the decades when globalization theory was picking up speed. Introduction xvii Galvanized by the 1990s publication of Lawrence Buell’s The Environmental Imagination and Cheryll Glotfelty and Harold Fromm’s The Ecocriticism Reader as well as by the 1992 founding of the Association for the Study of Literature and Environment (ASLE), ecocriticism promotes a systematic inquiry into the place of nature in Western thought, oftentimes taking on the sagas and legacies of global modernity and opposing to its abstractions a grounded, phenomenal, earth- anchored ethics and aesthetics.25 Largely outside the projects of environmentalism and ecocriticism but ostensibly sympathetic to them was also Basarab Nicolescu’s planetarily and cosmically minded “world vision.” By the time the French polymath laid out the latter in his 1994 Théorèmes poétiques and brought it to bear on the mod- ern schemas of territorially, politically, culturally, and disciplinarily discrete discourse, the world as cosmological entity had been part of conversation in the arts and humanities for some time.26 The notion gained momentum as a critical theme with Yi- Fu Tuan’s Cosmos and Hearth, Gérard Raulet’s Critical Cosmology, Félix Guattari’s “chaosmotic” and “ethico- aesthetic paradigm” (Chaosmose), Anne Phillips’s cosmos- based multiculturalism, and other similar, late 1990s and early 2000s increasingly well-c onfigured efforts to swerve from the rhetoric of the globe while drawing, with growing benefit, on the figures of cosmos and cosmology.27 In hindsight, this looks like an important and necessary discursive stage in the transition from the rhetoric, hermeneutics, and, ultimately, the politics of globalization to planetarity. As a phenomenologically oriented idea, the cosmological appealed to critics, who, before leaving it behind, mined it for fertile, ecological- culturological and ethical tropes, which in turn would pave the way to another key move: from “cosmos” to “planet.” Many found this progression justified, for at least two reasons. On the one hand, “cosmos” was too akin to “globe” and “global- ization” in that it figured the Earth as a cosmic body, part of a macrosystem organized according to system-s pecific rules and, more generally, to a ratio- nality some scholars found culturally and epistemologically constraining. On the other hand, the discourse of cosmos and cosmic relationality remained too broad from the vantage point of an anthropologically pertinent scalarity. As Amy J. Elias points out, “the planetary model” and the new “chronotope” it has made available to the arts and their interpretation were “opposed to the dehumanizing context of cosmic space constructed by science and then, as a metaphor for the cybernetic, to scientific rationality.”28 The planetary field’s most significant counter to the global—u nderstood primarily as a financially, economically, and technologically homogenizing force— is its relationality model and return to ethics. Indeed, in our judg- ment, the best discussions of planetarity gravitate away from global studies’ obsessions with economic, political, and technical administration and move closer to the vital problem of the ethical relation obtaining in new mod- els of transnationality, internationality, or multinationality. This relational potenza— the “strength” of the multitudes of the planet— multiplies the xviii Amy J. Elias and Christian Moraru meaning of relatedness and, by the same movement, challenges us to stabi- lize relational ontosemantics, to articulate what relationality does and stands for in the world.29 Concomitantly descriptive and prescriptive, analytic and normative (“aspirational”), theories of planetarity unfold a vision not of glo- balized earth but, as Elias maintains in her Planetary Turn essay, of a “world commons,” thus helping us conceptualize how cultural productions such as art enable this vision. This move is particularly indebted to Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak and Masao Miyoshi. The stakes of Spivak’s 1999 essay “The Imperative to Re- Imagine the Planet” were profoundly ethical although, in keeping with her poststructuralist and psychoanalytic allegiances, the “imperative” she spoke of was non- totalizing and reaffirmed both a Levinasian ethics and a Derridean courting of the uncanny, of unheimliche unhomeliness.30 In her intervention, Spivak positioned planetarity “to control globalization interruptively, to locate the imperative in the indefinite radical alterity of the other space of [the] planet[,] to deflect the rational imperative of capitalist globalization,” and thus “to displace dialogics into this set of contradictions.”31 In line with Emmanuel Levinas’s ethics of alterity, she insisted that life on the planet must be “lived as the call of the wholly other.” Thus, in Spivak, the planet morphs into a “cosmopolitheia,” both an astronomical body and a “defracted view of ethics,” as space becomes another name for “alterity.”32 As she wrote a few years later in Death of a Discipline (2003), I propose the planet to overwrite the globe. Globalization is the impo- sition of the same system of exchange everywhere. In the gridwork of electronic capital, we achieve that abstract ball covered in latitudes and longitudes, cut by virtual lines. . . . To talk planet- talk by way of an unexamined environmentalism, referring to an undivided “natu- ral” space rather than a differentiated political space, can work in the interest of this globalization in the mode of the abstract as such. . . . The globe is on our computers. No one lives there. . . . The planet is in the species of alterity, belonging to another system. . . . Planet thought opens up to embrace an inexhaustible taxonomy of such names [for a radical alterity and intention toward the other].33 The planetary claims of Death of a Discipline have provoked replies from various critical quarters. Continuing into the 1990s and the first decades of the third millennium, Spivak’s inquiries into issues of translation, comparison and the incommensurable, communication, globalization, subalternity, and regional welfare led her to bring serious charges against globalist imperialism, cosmopolitan arrogance, and the cultural parochialism typically following from both. As a remedy, she proposed solutions as diverse as revaluation of place, familiarization with other languages and thought paradigms, and, more broadly, genuine contact with alterity, even though, in practice, her Introduction xix handling of Levinasian ethics and the semiological indeterminism of post- structuralist extraction at play in her reasoning sometimes risked preventing such dealings and exchanges from working more concretely as an effectively relational, world- transforming dialogics. Underscoring the same need for renewal on a similarly large scale, Miy- oshi’s 2001 article “Turn to the Planet: Literature, Diversity, and Totality” grounded its manifestly epochalist-e pistemological argument in a planetary paradigm shift. Miyoshi observed that a change of historical proportions had been afoot since the globalizing 1980s; this change, as Neil Turnbull later noted, “heighten[ed] the conceptual importance of the earth” across all mate- rial and cultural forms and arenas.34 Miyoshi too found globalism wanting because, plagued by a structural insufficiency, it appeared exclusionist, tout- ing a universal good but bestowing it only on the privileged few for whom techno- mercantile connectedness operates beneficially. Since “the return to the nation- state,” he specifies in his essay, is not a realistic solution, “there is [now] one such core site for organizing such an inclusiveness, though entirely negative at present: the future of the global environment. For the first time in human history, one single commonality involves all those living on the planet: environmental deterioration as a result of the human consumption of natural resources.”35 Acknowledging this “total commonality” as the premise for “map[ping] out our world and [for] engag[ing] in research and scholar- ship” is a stepping-stone to the all- too- important recognition that literature and literary studies now have one basis and goal: to nur- ture our common bonds to the planet—t o replace the imaginaries of exclusionary familialism, communitarianism, nationhood, ethnic culture, regionalism, “globalization,” or even humanism, with the ideal of planetarianism. Once we accept this planet-b ased totality, we might for once agree in humility to devise a way to share with all the rest our only true public space and resources.36 In certain respects, Miyoshi’s take on planetarity is closer to posthuman envi- ronmentalism than to Spivak’s cosmopolitan crypto- humanism. Moreover, some of his assertions are not completely clear, fully developed, or entirely persuasive. Together, however, the two critics made a decisive push down a path further blazed by comparatists and theorists such as Emily Apter, Paul Giles, and, in particular, Wai Chee Dimock, whose trans- nationalist, “deep- time” forays and conceptualizations of a new, planet- oriented scalarity and aggregation scheme in literary history have been particularly influential in this burgeoning planetary vocabulary. A quick glance at the amount of schol- arship inspired by these three critics’ ethical-r elational and cross- territorial reconstructions of globalization as planetarity suggests that, historically co- a rticulated with the global lexicon and concerns as it has been, the planet model may be at this juncture well situated to fulfill, in the humanities at xx Amy J. Elias and Christian Moraru least, earlier dreams of critically “purging” the globe (Apter) or even “over- writing” it (Spivak).37 Still somewhat bothersome, of course, is the “terminological quandary” lingering in the interchangeable use of “globalization,” “globality,” and “glo- balism,” as Marshall Brown has remarked. On the one hand, “globality” has been defined by critics such as Beck as the global’s abstract cousin. As such, it “means that we have been living for a long time in a world society, in the sense that the notion of closed spaces has become illusory.” “No country or group,” the German sociologist concludes, “can shut itself off from others” any longer. Globality also implies “that from now on nothing which happens on our planet is only a local and limited event; all inventions, victories and catastrophes affect the whole world.”38 On the other hand, “by globalism,” critics such as Brown “understand an idea, an image, a potential; by global- ization[,] a process, a material phenomenon, a destiny.”39 As far as we are concerned, “globalism” is primarily a cosa mentale, a subjective, reflexive- evaluative position designating an attitude or mode of perceiving things “in global perspective.” In globalism, we underscore a life perspective and an epistemological stance toward a global ensemble wherein the parts communicate and must face up to their interdependence. But, as we have stressed, the global paradigm has not been particularly effective in weighing the cultural, political, and ethical implications of world intercon- nectivity, and so, to avoid a confusion at once existential, methodological, and terminological, we offer up planetarity as a critical substitute. Retooled around planetary semantics and its ramifications across ethics, phenom- enology, and epistemology, world cultures might leave room, in Roland Robertson’s assessment, both for “relativism,” that is, for a sense that cul- tures are “bound- up,” and for “worldism,” or “the claim that it is possible and, indeed, desirable to grasp the world as a whole analytically” while keep- ing in mind that no “reference t[o] the dynamics of the entire ‘world-s ystem’ ” can afford to lose sight of the complexities, contradictions, and other asys- temic features that might leap at us whenever we do not base the analysis too strictly on the “world- systemic, economic realm.”40 It is in this light that, in an essay also chiming in with the positions formulated in The Planetary Turn, Min Hyoung Song reaches the conclusion that “there is . . . something sovereign about what gets signified by globalization, a nomos that divides, restricts, hierarchizes, and criminalizes. It is a royal epistemology, a striation. Planetarity, then, might be thought of as a different order of connection, an interrelatedness that runs along smooth surfaces, comprises multitudes, and manifests movement.”41 Thus, while flat- out dismissal or wholesale demonization of globalization processes in economy, technology, and cul- ture remains misguided, the planetary perforce builds on the global, critiques it, and, to some degree, “completes” it. But, as Warnier puts it bluntly, if “speaking of the ‘globalization of culture’ is abusive,” the abuse may be even more egregious if planetary culture is still conceived in similarly “globalistic” Introduction xxi ways.42 The “hard” materiality of globalization—a “hard” planet— is or has the tendency of becoming a consistent oneness wedded to selfsameness, a homogenous and “defacing” or disfiguring whole impervious to smaller figures, cultural rhetorics, and voices. Instead, the geoaesthetic planetary ensemble toward which our book’s essays variously work designates a “soft” materiality within which relatedness both recognizes and hinges on negotia- tions of difference and where, as such, being-i n- relation may be pressed into service with an eye to fostering ethical relations worldwide. Cosmopolitanism and Planetarity A fairly substantial body of critical literature has already gone some distance toward accounting for this ethical relationality on a range of scales. This corpus has coalesced around cosmopolis, the cosmopolite, and cosmopoli- tanism, a set of time-h onored ideas, foci, and geocultural-i ntellectual models that regained force in the academy and popular press roughly at the same moment as did globalization. As is well known, the ethical- philosophical concept of cosmopolitanism has a long history in the West and elsewhere. The origins of cosmopolitan deliberation can be traced back to the thinkers of ancient Greece and Rome, primarily to the Cynics and the Stoics, who argued for an individual’s belonging both to the local- national polity and to humanity’s greater commonwealth beyond his or her family, kind, or coun- try, outside which the kosmopolitēs must care for and generally be in an ethical relationship with others. Is planetarity, then, simply another word for cosmopolitanism? To answer, it might be useful to turn briefly to Amanda Anderson’s discus- sion of the dialectical tension between cosmopolitanism and universalism in Western philosophy. Anderson treats cosmopolitanism not as a counter- modernity but as a strain of thought within modernity itself. Differentiating between, on the one hand, a Habermasian, public- sphere approach that appeals to a sense of universal community, and, on the other, a popularized “cosmopolitan sensibility,” she reminds us that cosmopolitanism was revived in the humanities as a reaction to “a strictly negative critique of Enlighten- ment” and combines a skepticism “of partial or false universals with the pursuit of those emancipatory ideals associated with traditional universalism.”43 Like “strategic essentialism” operating in cultural critique, cosmopolitanism so defined is compatible with some aspects of Marxism and also counters overly restrictive definitions of community sometimes expressed by identity poli- tics. Moreover, it works against the early twenty- first- century reawakening of violent nationalisms and nationalistic identitarian agendas. “In general,” Anderson explains, “cosmopolitanism endorses reflective distance from one’s cultural affiliations, a broad understanding of other cultures and customs, and a belief in universal humanity.”44 She breaks down cosmopolitan philosophy xxii Amy J. Elias and Christian Moraru into two forms. One is “exclusionary” and values only an abstract or cos- mic universalism. The other is “inclusionary.” In this variant, universalism is shaped by “sympathetic imagination and intercultural exchange.” In this sense, we learn, “cosmopolitanism also tends to be exercised by the specifi- cally ethical challenges of perceived cultural relativisms; it aims to articulate not simply intellectual programs but ethical ideals for the cultivation of char- acter and for negotiating the experience of otherness, . . . to foster reciprocal and transformative encounters between strangers variously construed.”45 Neither moral relativism nor rigidly abstract universalism, this cosmopoli- tanism parts company with theories of local authenticity and rises at times in history when the world grows in population and, seemingly, in complexity.46 Such a perspective shores up and qualifies universalism with a much-n eeded “rhetoric of worldliness” and enlists translation as an ideal. Anderson turns to James Clifford’s notion of “discrepant cosmopolitanisms,” Bruce Rob- bins’s “mobile, reciprocal interconnectedness,” Seyla Benhabib’s “interactive universalism,” and Julia Kristeva’s “transnational Humanity” to illustrate the host of positions characterizing this “new cosmopolitanism.” She also notes the more radical ideas that begin to swirl around it at this juncture, such as Judith Butler’s “reconstructed universality” and Etienne Balibar’s real, fictive, and ideal universalities, the last of which is characterized by an “insurrection” against normalcy.47 Anderson admits, however, that anthropological ethics has not had significant purchase in old or new cosmopolitanisms, which by and large tend to gel instead around more urgent, counter- nationalist, anti- p arochial, and non- localist platforms.48 Where such philosophical propensities and political programs are con- cerned, new cosmopolitanism is closest to planetarity as we conceptualize it.49 Very roughly put, planetarity is to globalization what neo-c osmopolitanism is to universalism. It is true too that, like certain neo- cosmopolitan variet- ies, some theories of planetarity are less “counter- modernities” than critical rearticulations of modernity’s own dialectics, thriving as they do in the con- testatory spaces between warring universalism and particularism or between local and global contexts. These interstices are, for example, the sites Ursula K. Heise links to “eco- cosmopolitanism” from an emphatically planetary per- spective.50 Similarly to some versions of neo- cosmopolitanism, a few models of planetarity align themselves openly with a “modified universalism” or new humanisms, affirming the role of shared human experiences and values across cultures. Finally, not unlike cosmopolitan ethics, planetarity puts much stock in encounter with difference, in recognition and toleration of alterity, and in reciprocity and translation as seminal to any peaceful, cross- cultural, and transnational interaction.51 The differences between planetarity and twenty- first- century cosmo- politanism, however, should not be discounted. Though ancient and recent cosmopolitanisms take into account behaviors, politics, and lifestyles and thus attend to phenomenological being in the world, cosmopolitanism manifests Introduction xxiii itself chiefly as a philosophical enterprise whose cardinal thrust is ethical and hermeneutical. It is a kind of knowledge and interpretation of the world, a way one mentally processes environments, assesses them, and endorses attitudes in them. In contrast, the planetary reaches beyond the hermeneutical to the ontological. Planetarity is not, as Susan Stanford Friedman says, just an episte- mology, merely an inquisitive forma mentis, a mindset eager to take the world in.52 Planetarity is also in and of this world, its modality of being, describing both a phenomenological perception and a new theater of being whose nov- elty is becoming more conspicuous every day. “You wonder,” writes Bharati Mukherjee in her 2004 novel The Tree Bride, “if everyone and everything in the world is intimately related. . . . You pluck a thread and it leads to . . . every- where.” And she goes on to ask: “Is there a limit to relatedness?”53 If there is one, it is that of the cosmos itself, with planetarity both indexing and probing the world as a relational domain. Thus, sympathetic as we certainly remain to cosmopolitanism’s spectacular resurgence in critical theory, we define “planet” and “planetary” as a noun and an attribute signifying and qualifying, respec- tively, a multicentric and pluralizing, “actually existing” worldly structure of relatedness critically keyed to non- totalist, non- homogenizing, and anti- h egemonic operations typically and polemically subtended by an eco- logic. Here, the eco- logical is not a subsidiary appendage, for its logic signals another departure from new cosmopolitan theory. Unlike the latter, which spotlights solely human and largely discursive cultural and intergroup rela- tionships, planetarity opens itself as well to the nonhuman, the organic, and the inorganic in all of their richness. Informed by an ecocritical perspective, it affirms the planet as both a biophysical and a new cultural base for human flourishing. Accordingly, planetarization and its outcome, planetarity, trace a three- layered process whereby (1) the earth qua material planet becomes visible to theory and its abstractions as the non-n egotiable ecological ground for human and nonhuman life; (2) individuals and societies of the earth as cosmo- polis heed an imperative to “worlding,” that is, the creation of an ethi- cal, “diversal,” and relational ensemble so as to guarantee the survival of all species; and (3) the phenomenal earth seeps into our conceptual elaborations and ways of seeing the world, thus refounding our interpretative categories, our aesthetics, and our cultural lives. Axial to the planetarity paradigm are the notion and practice of steward- ship in the world commons. The regulative principle is either largely absent from or suspect in cosmopolitan debates, where it raises uncomfortable associations with paternalism, colonialism, and monopoly capital. In point of fact, theories of cosmopolitanism are constantly plagued by— much as they struggle to undo and reweave— the historically close and forever taxing relation between, on the one side, cosmopolitan overtures and Orientalist curiosity, and, on the other side, cosmopolitan contact and colonial control.54 In the ecocritically informed discourse of planetarity, however, “stewardship” may be better positioned to take on politically less fraught connotations. It xxiv Amy J. Elias and Christian Moraru connotes both an ethics of care for both organic and inorganic planetary resources and a social stance mindful to conserve cultural legacies. At the end of the day, the most controversial aspect of planetary stewardship may not be its paternalistic- colonialist disposition but rather its anthropocen- tric bent, insofar as it implies that humans hold (and deserve) the privileged role of stewards among animate and inanimate entities that are all together entangled in planetary relation. Stewardship as we conceive it here, however, would be both a recognition of and a counter to the negative effects of the Anthropocene and anthropocentric effects in a global environment.55 In asserting a “world commons” as stewardship’s theater of operations, planetarity also deviates from cosmopolitanism’s well- trodden geographies, itineraries, and spatial fantasies. Cosmopolitan’s champions frequently talk about travel and contact, border- crossing, and negotiating difference in unfamiliar territories. In contrast, planetarity’s proponents discuss how to make the world a commonly familiar space, a shared resource, and a home for all. Furthermore, the world commons so grasped are not universalist, homogeneous, monocultural, or monological. They imply a complex plan- etary network including nested but nonhierarchical cultural and material ecosystems— commutual constellations, sites, and forms of life ranging in scale but acknowledging, serving, and honoring a shared, affectively and materially interrelated, inhabited world space. Planetary relatedness is thus bioconnective. Not a monologue but an echo, speaking to us not through a mouthpiece but as through a sonar, cultural discourse and identity come about through the connection of bodies in space and time in the post– Cold War, planetary age. They surface more relationally and dialogically every day, according to the logic of the Greek dià: always belatedly, obliquely, by a detour through the world’s distant or just “differ- ent” places, intervals, and styles. Reading planetarily, then, is necessarily reading comparatively, and this is a main reason we are witnessing, within critical theory, a resurgence of interest in translation as comparative reading and cultural interaction.56 Actively worlding the world, making it a world of relations, and attend- ing to them: what we are talking about when we talk about the planet in these terms is (1) the planetary configuration or ontological condition the planet brings about and (2) an approach or cluster of approaches befitting this condition’s cultural- aesthetic symptomatology, an apposite understand- ing of virtual and physical spatiality that constitutes the lived circumstance of interrelatedness. While tribal, feudal, consanguinean, and kindred relation- ships are usually worked out in face- to- face relations or through established community networks and protocols ordinarily closed to outsiders, woven together into the classical, territorialized, geographically bounded Gemein- schaft or “community” type of human association, the relationships typical of planetary contemporaneousness operate across space, launched as they are both from nearby and afar. In that, they are no less concrete or life- enhancing, Introduction xxv for they render the planet a cultural geography of distance management, a platform of survival, an aesthetic trope connoting these attributes, and a criti- cal lens through which to evaluate their shape, meaning, and impact. Now that more and more of us are awaking to the fragility of our common world ecosystems as well as to the tenuousness of some of their immediate, national allegiances, a theoretically plausible and critically effective, social and aes- thetic model turning on planetary relation is, we think, a matter of urgency. Planetarity and the Bioconnective Aesthetic A caveat is in order at this point: the planetary culture notion should be taken as heuristic rather than deterministic. The function we assign it for now is cautiously exploratory; we posit the planetary as an absolutely defining and sole context neither for cultural production nor for its interpretation. As a new episteme, and in contrast to well-k nown globalization models, the plan- etary is not, to us at least, a one- world, genetically determinant, uniform, and homogenizing totality. Poised to forge a culture of sharing and participation, harbingers of planetarity have not yet erected a stable and wholly crystallized sustentation for an ecumenically and equitably enjoyed, economic or sociocul- tural commonwealth. Such an ethical configuration of material planetarity is still to be adequately thought out and built, which is one reason a sufficiently consolidated ecoculture is still on the horizon. Nonetheless, if, “soft” and “loose” as it may be, planetarity furnishes the cultural-d iscursive matrix of emerging art, then the dialogical and the relational may well encapsulate the operations and values of a planetary imaginary and of its thematic- aesthetic protocols. Moraru has observed that the post- 1989 historical intermezzo of “cosmodernism” translates, inside and outside the United States, primarily into an imaginary, a way of picturing the world. As the contributors to The Planetary Turn notice repeatedly, the planetary imaginary currently making inroads across the arts shows a predilection for certain themes— particularly the arche- thematic “world”— specifically for a sheaf of metathemes deployed with characteristically growing frequency around the quasi- omnipresent world subject and its worldly subcategories. And, while a distinctively plan- etary stylistics is still in the offing, isomorphic to this geothematics seems to be a relational aesthetics visible in artists’ keen attention to at- distance inter- action, intertextuality, remediation, mash- up, recycling, and quotation. As marginalia to such encodings and interpolations of planetarity, our book asks (1) if a geocultural arena of aesthetic production is taking shape in which the various discourse- engendering functions, narratives, and epistemologi- cal tools historically attributed to the operations of the nation- state model are now being put to the test, broken, or refashioned; (2) if the twenty- first century is witnessing the rise of a broader, postnational formation, which is the planet; and (3) if the latter is thus becoming a dominant environment, xxvi Amy J. Elias and Christian Moraru onto- ethical ground, and conceptual- methodological frame of reference for proliferating socio- aesthetics and critical exercise. As a material and analytic master framework rather than a fully con- solidated system, the planetary is capacious and integrative; it has its ebbs and flows; it transforms and surprises. In keeping with the etymology of the ancient Greek planaō, the planetary remains shifty, cannot help turning, liter- ally and linguistically, and so it is neither an ontological nor a hermeneutic given, let alone a completed project. The planetary does not stamp all art objects or all artworks equally, nor does it elucidate them completely. To us, the planet is not only a new cultural landscape throughout which people and their sustaining projections wander, connect, and reproduce, but also a “wondering” domain of twists and turns, perplexities, inquiries, and flashes of insight. Our overall objective is to start mapping this expanse, that is, to begin to read the planetary as a repertoire of aesthetic routines structurally presupposing and further stimulating relationality. This reading prompts at least five categories of query. First, what are plan- etarity’s ethics, politics, and theories of value? Which are the benchmarks, yardsticks, and tools that supply the basis and instruments of planetary criti- cism? Second, in what ways is this geoaesthetic condition of planetarity new, and how does it rehearse or critically move beyond the forms and tenets of earlier cultural- aesthetic theories or historical movements such as modern- ism and postmodernism? What new vocabulary do we need to talk about the planetary’s distinctive nature? Third, to what extent are geoaesthetic spaces familiar or compatible with the traditional cartographies, analytic grids, nar- rative recipes, measuring and scalar units, and aggregation entities recognized by “methodological nationalism” and, in particular, by literary history?57 Fourth, what would a “planetary art” be like? What would mark an unfold- ing planetary aesthetics, and in what kind of stylistics, if any, are planetarity’s relationality and dialogics couched? How might such an aesthetics reframe classical values such as authenticity, originality, and novelty? What do we mean when we claim that the planet animates work X or that author Y oper- ates within a planetary horizon or outlook? Fifth and finally, what is the relation between the universal and the particular, geoculture and local cul- ture, place and planet in artworks stemming from or interpreted through a planetary aesthetic? How does the planetary paradigm’s relational-d ialogical poiesis play out across discourses, styles, and media? How does “world art” promote dialogue among and between people, institutions, traditions, and forms? How are we to receive, decipher, and distribute planetary works? Planetary Theory and Critical Praxis In answering these questions, our contributors take steps toward (1) theoriz- ing the planetary condition; (2) devising and testing modalities of reading Introduction xxvii aesthetic and cultural symptoms of planetarity in a fashion germane to the planetary ethics of relationality; and (3) working out, albeit independently and, for the most part, inductively, a reasonably functional and sufficiently detailed model of the planetary aesthetic and its geocultural modus operandi. With this threefold end in sight, we lead off with John D. Pizer’s “Planetary Poetics: World Literature, Goethe, Novalis, and Yoko Tawada’s Translational Writing,” which addresses the recent planetary turn against the backdrop of eighteenth- century German criticism. Pizer examines the tripartite transla- tion schemes of Goethe and Novalis to stress that Goethe’s “world literature” model, so perennially influential in comparative studies, was grounded in a largely Eurocentric literary cosmopolitanism that we might associate nowadays with a similarly oriented globalism. Novalis, on the other hand, envisioned, in Pizer’s reading, a proto-W eltliteratur in literary fragments that introduced an intermediary, collective, or local level of human contacts that subtly shifted transnational literature from a global cosmopolitanism of cultural interchanges to one similar to contemporary planetary relation- ality. Today, Japanese- German author Yoko Tawada enacts such planetary consciousness as sensitivity to translation issues in a way that proves, Pizer asserts, more consonant with Novalis’s pre- nationalist cosmopolitanism than with Goethe’s Weltliteratur. Focusing, in the next chapter, less on the historical genealogy of plan- etarity and more on its dimensionality, Hester Blum examines the mutual investment of planetary and oceanic studies in the recalibration of the static optics and chronometrics of land. “Terraqueous Planet: The Case for Oceanic Studies” explains how the sea nulls time and space metaphors and abstrac- tions imposed by global capital and nation- sponsored, landed geographies, and, further, how authors like Henry David Thoreau and Herman Melville endorse alternate, materialist, and labor-b ased understandings of time and space that are so important to our own planetary moment. Both planetary and oceanic studies reveal, Blum concludes, “the artificiality and intellectual limitations of national, political, linguistic, physiological, or temporal bound- aries,” as well as the risks incurred by a thinking that, wedded too deeply to land- derived tropes and calculations, abstracts earth and sea from human toil, employment, and daily struggle for survival. In “The Commons . . . and Digital Planetarity,” Amy J. Elias aligns the planetary with “the commons” and implicitly offers a rejoinder to the Spivakian poststructuralist ethics of alterity. Elias investigates how the “com- mons,” as a social space organized on the model of neither the nation- state nor the free market, is now brought in line with the idea of the Internet as a new planetary collective. Reviewing key theoretical claims about commons construction within the fields of public economy, digital media, and affect studies, she contends that, because fully functioning common pool resources demand dialogic relationality among users, such theories fail to account for the necessarily ethical foundations of those resources. For, Elias demonstrates, xxviii Amy J. Elias and Christian Moraru conceptions of human agency, ethics, and law— all suspect in contemporary digital theory for some time— are or should be central to the construction and maintenance of any planetary digital commons. “The Possibility of Cyber-P lacelessness: Digimodernism on a Planetary Platform,” Alan Kirby’s contribution to The Planetary Turn, furthers Elias’s inquiry into the digital by nuancing the “digimodernist” coinage he intro- duced in his 2009 book. As we learn, digimodernism is a descriptor of the present stage, which replaces, Kirby ventures, a now obsolete postmodern paradigm and is characterized by the digitizing of the textual artifact and the technologizing of cultural expressions. Tying into “cyber-p lacelessness,” digimodernism allows Kirby to refute Spivak’s claims that planetarity should be set in opposition to computerization. The local, he proposes, can be rein- scribed within a globalizing platform by way of a planetary dialectic. Raoul Eshelman’s “Archetypologies of the Human: Planetary Performa- tism, Cinematic Relationality, and Iñárritu’s Babel” directly takes on the planetarity views Spivak articulated in Death of a Discipline. Not unlike her, Eshelman is skeptical of traditional humanism. His solution, however, is “performatism,” the new, anthropologically founded episteme he proposed in his 2008 book. Performatist planetarity, Eshelman argues, casts light on the human as a unified, biosocial construct motivated by the nondiscursive modes of mimesis and intuition. Its dominant technique in artworks is “dou- ble framing.” This procedure takes a narrative scene or detail and correlates it to the mimetic logic of the whole work so as to manipulate audiences into subscribing to the claims of an artificial, closed construct. Laying out the performative as a textual- interpretive category over and against Spivak’s dis- cursive figure, Eshelman illustrates how performatism structures Alejandro Iñárritu’s film Babel (2006) and, more broadly, how a performatism-g uided planetary approach might work. Also dealing with film, Laurie Edson’s “Planetarity, Performativity, Rela- tionality: Claire Denis’s Chocolat and Cinematic Ethics” too trades on Spivak’s planetarity to drive home the point that the relational ethics of plan- etarity is well poised to replace globalization’s treatment of singularities. Her patient examination of Claire Denis’s 1988 film Chocolat dwells on rela- tionality, performativity, “learning from below,” “minor” transnationalism, horizontal networks, and related issues and phenomena instrumental to the planetary. In “Gilgamesh’s Planetary Turns,” Wai Chee Dimock seeks to rethink world literature within the paradigm the planetary turn has made avail- able to literary studies. As she observes, revisiting the venerable notion from the standpoint of shared planetary time and space changes our perceptions of world literature from a set of texts in a static canon to mobile cultural material— tropes, motifs, themes, and texts in intercontinental circulation. Focusing on the ways the Gilgamesh epic has been recycled throughout his- tory in different cultural locations, she explicates how literature and ecology Introduction xxix are both co-a rticulated with processes of decomposition and recomposition and how planetary life continuously works archetypal tropes into cultural productions. Paul Giles warns, however, in “Writing for the Planet: Contemporary Australian Fiction,” against what might be described as a “reglobalization” of planetarity, namely, against the notion’s lapsing back into a globalist- e ssentialist trope liable to erase geographical and historical differences among the world’s cultures once again. A theoretical-a nalytic stay against globalizing U.S. market capitalism, the planetary is, in Giles’s assessment, also laden with features of the American romantic worldview, and planetary critics would be well advised to keep the term’s ambiguities in mind. Against Miyoshi’s notion of the planet as unifying totality, planetary consciousness needs to be, Giles further counsels, more tightly bound up with, and supportive of, the plural- izing and “disorienting” perspective of cultural and historical “crosscurrents and crossovers” such as those traced in the nineteenth- century prose of Edgar Allan Poe and Melville as well as in twentieth- and twenty-fi rst- century Aus- tralian literature and art criticism of Bernard Smith, J. G. A. Pocock, Tim Winton, Gail Jones, Christos Tsiolkas, and Alexis Wright. These authors are exemplary in that, in Giles’s view, they disrupt conventional notions of social scale and human agency and shed light on planetarity as a theater of unequal cultural traffic and barterings. The Planetary Turn’s next chapter, Bertrand Westphal’s “The White Globe and the Paradoxical Cartography of Berger & Berger: A Meditation on Deceptive Evidence,” specifically tackles the idea of “globe” as totality. In his reflections on Laurent P. Berger and Cyrille Berger’s 2001 sculpture Astre blanc (White Star), Westphal raises questions about the nature of the blank map, uncharted space, and the planet’s depopulated areas. In the crit- ic’s interpretation, whiteness adduces in Berger & Berger’s works “deceptive evidence,” a saturation rather than a negation of meaning, which nonethe- less evokes images of emptiness, cataclysmic decimation, and “white sands.” Applying the geocritical method formulated and tested in La géocritique: Réel, fiction, espace (2007) and elsewhere, Westphal understands geographi- cal space as dynamic, mobile, and transgressive. Thus, he helps us discover the complex chromatics of a planet whose multiple colors fade out in the very attempt to colorize it on our geographical and political maps. “Comparing Contemporary Arts; or, Figuring Planetarity,” Terry Smith’s chapter, articulates a vision of twenty-fi rst- century world art as characterized by multiple, antinomial temporalities. He argues thus for a current move from modernity through postmodernity, contemporaneity, and planetarity. However, this historical trajectory does not rehearse traditional periodiza- tion. Instead, it foregrounds a “splitting” of modernity complete with uneven developments occurring at different rates and times throughout the world. Smith’s critical narrative identifies three currents in post-1 989 art: remod- ernist, retro- sensationalist, and spectacularist tendencies flow into the first xxx Amy J. Elias and Christian Moraru while aesthetic expression following nationalist/identitarian priorities and Do- It- Yourself art constitute the second and third. In these contexts, plan- etary figuration comes into play on a number of levels, including world-s cales of vision enabled by technology, an aesthetics of disappearance, and the by now ubiquitous imprint of “worlds within the World.” In “Beyond the Flaming Walls of the World: Fantasy, Alterity, and the Postnational Constellation,” Robert T. Tally Jr. maintains that through its estrangement techniques, the “discursive modality” of fantasy undercuts the conventions and standards of beauty embedded in national literatures and draws the reader imaginatively into the world and beyond it. Unlike the historical novel, which writers such as Walter Scott saw as serving national interests, fantasy fundamentally attends to planetary otherness and in so doing sets in train an otherworldly literary cartography of the postnational world- system. In his argument, the critic pays special attention to how the 1968 Time magazine “Earthrise” photo embodied this otherworldly view of the planet and became the focus of science fiction and fantasy literature as well as the master figure for a utopianism linked to similar meditations on the impossible. Our book’s closing chapter, Moraru’s “Decompressing Culture: Three Steps toward a Geomethodology,” is something of a hybrid. In the genre’s formally and intellectually exploratory spirit, “Decompressing Culture” blends a Deleuzian- Guattarian discourse of worldly territoriality, Levina- sian ethics and concerns of space technology, analysis of post- 9/11 fiction, and a more provocatively couched axiomatics so as to compose a manifesto of sorts and thus enter a plea on behalf of a certain algorithm of “plan- etary reading.” A systematic description of this interpretive model, he tells us, is as necessary as a strong emphasis on the model’s urgency, hence the rhetorical shifts of Moraru’s presentation throughout his piece. Moraru enu- merates some key planetary themes: the greater elsewhere and the planet itself; remote spaces, customs, and their “others” represented as intrinsic or internal to closer (“our”) places, groups, and their habits; a whole gamut of time- space constriction games and the bioconnective imaginings they spawn; and a new sense of togetherness and interdependence the resulting planetary iconology in turn endorses. After laying out the components or steps of his geomethodology, he applies it to works by Joseph O’Neill, Orhan Pamuk, Mircea Cărtărescu, and other novelists, and goes on to conclude by pinpoint- ing the ethical consequences of planetary reading. Notes 1. See Ulrich Beck, World Risk Society (Cambridge, Eng.: Polity; Malden, Mass.: Blackwell, 1999). 2. The literature on post- postmodernism is now threatening to rival in vol- ume the archive of postmodern theory, with scholarship by Mary Holland, Introduction xxxi Amy J. Elias, Timotheus Vermeulen, and Robin van den Akker (proponents of “metamodernism”), Alison Gibbons, Caren Irr, Leerom Medovoi, Rachel Adams, Min Hyoung Song, Bharati Mukherjee, and others steadily adding to it. Works addressing the question “What comes after postmodernism?” include Jeffrey T. Nealon’s Post- Postmodernism or, The Cultural Logic of Just- in- Time Capital- ism (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2012); a post- millennial special issue of symploke (12, nos. 1–2 [2004)]; a College English cluster of essays titled “Twentieth- Century Literature in the New Century: A Symposium” (64, no. 1 [September 2001]: 9– 33); and a Twentieth- Century Literature special issue edited by Andrew Hoberek, “After Postmodernism: Form and History in Contemporary American Fiction” (53, no. 3 [Fall 2007]). See also Timothy S. Murphy, “To Have Done with Postmodernism: A Plea (or Provocation) for Globalization Studies,” in symploke 12, nos. 1– 2 (2004): 20– 34; Robert L. McLaughlin, “Post- Postmodern Discontent: Contemporary Fiction and the Social World,” in symploke 12, nos. 1– 2 (2004): 53– 68; Brian McHale, “What Was Postmodernism?” in Electronic Book Review, December 20, 2007, http:// www .electronicbookreview .com/ thread/fictionspresent/tense; Christian Moraru, Cosmodernism: American Narra- tive, Late Globalization, and the New Cultural Imaginary (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2011); Neil Brooks and Josh Toth, eds., The Mourning After: Attending the Wake of Postmodernism (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2007); and Terry Smith, Contemporary Art: World Currents (Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pren- tice Hall, 2011). In “Thirteen Ways of Passing Postmodernism: Introduction to Focus,” 3– 4, an essay introducing his guest- edited American Book Review issue (34, no. 4 [May– June 2013]) on “metamodernism,” Moraru shows that the post- postmodern debate has reached the planetary stage. Additional evidence is provided, along these lines, by Narrative in the “Postmodernist Fiction: East and West” issue coedited by Wang Ning and Brian McHale (21, no. 3 [2013]). 3. Ulrich Beck and Edgar Grande, “Varieties of Second Modernity: The Cos- mopolitan Turn in Social and Political Theory and Research,” British Journal of Sociology 61, no. 3 (2010): 412. 4. See Christian Moraru, “The Global Turn in Critical Theory,” symploke 9, no. 1– 2 (2001): 80– 92. David Held advances the “strong globalization thesis” in the “Afterword” to his anthology A Globalizing World? Culture, Economics, Pol- itics (New York: Routledge in association with The Open University, 2000), 171. Christopher J. Kollmeyer takes up Held’s weak/strong globalization distinction in “Globalization, Class Compromise, and American Exceptionalism: Political Change in 16 Advanced Capitalist Countries,” published in Critical Sociology 29, no. 3 (October 2003): 369– 91. On “late globalization” and its cultural relevance in world and U.S. context, see, among others, Moraru, Cosmodernism, 33– 37. 5. Nicholas A. Ashford and Ralph P. Hall, Technology, Globalization, and Sus- tainable Development: Transforming the Industrial State (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2011), 4–5 . For useful and succinct introductions to global- ization, see Jürgen Osterhammel and Niels P. Petersson, Globalization: A Short History, trans. Dona Geyer (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2009); Manfred Steger, Globalization: A Very Short Introduction, 3rd ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013); and Akira Iriye and Jürgen Osterhammel, eds., Global Interdependence: The World after 1945 (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press), 2013. xxxii Amy J. Elias and Christian Moraru 6. Nick Bisley, in Rethinking Globalization (Basingstoke, Eng.: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007), 6, 30, outlines what he sees as the three key engines of global- ization: economics, sociology, and politics (23). Bisley lists a number of theoretical models for post– World War II global development including, for economic glo- balization, those of Samir Amin’s Re-R eading the Postwar Period (New York: Monthly Review, 1994) and of Alex Callinicos, ed., “Europe on the Edge,” a special issue of International Socialism 63 (1994). On sociological globalization, Bisley references David Held and Anthony McGrew, eds., The Global Transfor- mations Reader: An Introduction to the Globalization Debate, 2nd ed. (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005); and Manuel Castells’s The Information Age trilogy: The Rise of the Network Society, Vol. 1: The Information Age: Economy, Society, and Culture (Oxford, Eng.: Blackwell, 1996); The Power of Identity, Vol. 2, The Information Age: Economy, Society, and Culture, 2nd ed. (Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley- Blackwell, 2009); and End of Millennium, Vol. 3, The Information Age: Economy, Society, and Culture (Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley-B lackwell, 1998). Discuss- ing political globalization, he cites, among others, Ankie Hoogvelt, Globalization and the Postcolonial World: The New Political Economy of Development, 2nd ed. (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001); and Randall D. Germain, Globalization and Its Critics: Perspectives from Political Economy (Basingstoke, Eng.: Palgrave Macmillan, 2000). Germain’s more recent book on world admin- istration and finance, Global Politics and Financial Governance (Basingstoke, Eng.: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010), also deserves mention. 7. Immanuel Wallerstein, Geopolitics and Geoculture: Essays on the Changing World- System (Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press; Paris: Maison des Sciences de l’Homme, 1991), 140. Wallerstein’s autopoietic globalization is artic- ulated in his books The Modern World- System, volumes I–I V, all reissued in 2011 by the University of California Press; see too Immanuel Wallerstein’s Utopistics, or Historical Choices of the Twenty- First Century (New York: New, 1998). 8. See Giovanni Arrighi, The Long Twentieth Century: Money, Power, and the Origins of Our Times (New York: Verso, 2010), originally published in 1994. 9. Allan Cochrane and Kathy Pain, “Chapter 1: A Globalizing Society?” in A Globalizing World? Culture, Economics, Politics, ed. David Held (New York: Routledge in association with The Open University, 2000), 23. 10. In the context of media studies, for instance, this perspective informs Don Slater’s New Media, Development and Globalization: Making Connections in the Global South (Cambridge, Eng.: Polity, 2013). 11. See, for example, Martin Albrow, The Global Age: State and Society Beyond Modernity (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1997). 12. Jean- Pierre Warnier, La mondialisation de la culture, 3rd ed. (Paris: La Découverte, 2004), 32. Also see Moraru, introduction to Cosmodernism, 15– 75. 13. On Pierre Chaunu’s univers cloisonné, most relevant is the author’s book Histoire, science sociale: La durée, l’espace et l’homme à l’époque moderne (Paris: Société d’édition d’enseignement supérieur, 1974). 14. Ken Jowitt, New World Disorder: The Leninist Extinction (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992). Zygmunt Bauman refers to Jowitt’s book in Globalization: The Human Consequences (New York: Columbia Univer- sity Press, 1998), 59. For Tzvetan Todorov, see Le nouveau désordre mondial: Réflexions d’un Européen (Paris: Robert Laffont, 2003). On the “chaos” of the Introduction xxxiii contemporary world, the reader might consult Amin Maalouf’s recent book Le dérèglement du monde (Paris: Grasset & Fasquelle, 2009); and Immanuel Waller- stein’s article “New Revolts Against the System,” New Left Review, 2nd series, 18 (November–December 2002): 37. Joseph Stiglitz develops his critique most famously in Globalization and Its Discontents (New York: W. W. Norton, 2003). Zillah Eisenstein’s views have been set out in Against Empire: Feminisms, Rac- ism, and the West (New York: Zed Books, 2004). 15. Allan Cochrane and Kathy Pain refer to Paul Q. Hirst and Grahame Thomp- son’s 1996 book Globalization in Question: The International Economy and the Possibility of Governance, 2nd ed. (1999). “Planetary dysphoria,” Emily Apter explains in the closing chapters of her latest book, is a “geo-p sychoanalytic” concept that captures the essence of our planet’s “dark ecology” or “state of the world at its most depressed and unruhig [restless], awaiting the triumphant revenge of acid, oil, and dust.” See Apter’s Against World Literature: On the Poli- tics of Untranslatability (London: Verso, 2013), 338, 341. 16. We refer the reader to the essays in Frank J. Lechner and John Boli, The Globalization Reader (Malden, Mass.: Blackwell, 2000); and in Fredric Jameson and Masao Miyoshi, eds., The Cultures of Globalization (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1998). Some critics point to a “postglobal age.” See, in this regard, Ulrike Bergermann, Isabell Otto, and Gabriele Schabacher, eds., Das Planetarische: Kultur- Technik- Medien in postglobalen Zeitalter (Munich: Wilhelm Fink, 2010). 17. See Slavoj Žižek, Welcome to the Desert of the Real: Five Essays on Sep- tember 11 and Related Dates (New York: Verso, 2002), and his First as Tragedy, Then as Farce (New York: Verso, 2009); Douglas Kellner, “Globalization, Terror- ism, and Democracy: 9/11 and Its Aftermath,” http://p ages.gseis.ucla .edu/faculty/ kellner/essays/- globalizationterroraftermath.pdf; as well as Kellner’s From 9/11 to Terror War: Dangers of the Bush Legacy (Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Little- field, 2003). 18. See Phillip E. Wegner, Life between Two Deaths, 1989– 2001: U.S. Culture in the Long Nineties (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2009), especially the introduction. 19. See, for example, Terhi Rantanen, The Media and Globalization (Lon- don: Sage Publications, 2004); William Uricchio, We Europeans? Media, Representations, Identities (Bristol, Eng.: Intellect, 2009); Tanner Mirrlees, Global Entertainment Media: Between Cultural Imperialism and Cultural Glo- balization (New York: Routledge, 2013). 20. McKenzie Wark, Virtual Geography: Living with Global Media Events (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1994) and Telesthesia: Communication, Culture, and Class (Cambridge, Eng.: Polity, 2012); Paul Virilio, The Informa- tion Bomb (New York: Verso, 2006); Douglas Kellner, Media Spectacle and Insurrection, 2011: From the Arab Uprisings to Occupy Everywhere (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2011); Richard Grusin, Premediation: Affect and Medi- ality after 9/11 (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010). Sources discussing the relation of media and technology to globalization are myriad and range through political positions and disciplinary contexts. A few examples might include David Tabachnick and Toivo Koivukoski, Globalization, Technology, and Phi- losophy (Albany: SUNY Press, 2004); Kevin Robins and Frank Webster, Times of the Technoculture: From the Information Society to the Virtual Life (London: xxxiv Amy J. Elias and Christian Moraru Routledge, 1999); and Kaushalesh Lal, Information and Communication Tech- nologies in the Context of Globalization: Evidence from Developing Countries (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008). 21. Manuel Castells, Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in the Internet Age (Cambridge, Eng.: Polity, 2012); Jennifer Earl and Katrina Kim- port, Digitally Enabled Social Change: Activism in the Internet Age (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2011). 22. See, for instance, Pico Iyer’s The Global Soul: Jet Lag, Shopping Malls, and the Search for Home (New York: Random House, 2000) and Thomas L. Fried- man’s books The Lexus and the Olive Tree: Understanding Globalization (New York: Picador, 2012) and The World Is Flat 3.0: A Brief History of the Twenty- First Century (New York: Farrar, Strauss and Giroux, 2006). 23. Saskia Sassen takes on “the development of new jurisdictional geographies” in “Neither Global nor National: Novel Assemblages of Territory, Authority, and Rights,” published in Ethics and Global Politics 1, no. 1– 2 (2008): 61– 79. 24. Martin Albrow, “Who Rules the Global Rule Makers?” in La Vie des idées (November 3, 2011). The text is also available in English at the mirror site “Books and Ideas,” http:// www .booksandideas .net/Who- Rules- the- Global- Rule - Makers .html. 25. Lawrence Buell, The Environmental Imagination: Thoreau, Nature Writ- ing, and the Formation of American Culture (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1996); Cheryll Glotfelty and Harold Fromm, eds., The Ecocriticism Reader: Landmarks in Literary Ecology (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1996). 26. Basarab Nicolescu, Théorèmes poétiques (Paris: Rocher, 1994). 27. Yi- Fu Tuan, Cosmos and Hearth: A Cosmopolite’s Viewpoint (Minne- apolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1996), 187– 88; Gérard Raulet, Critical Cosmology: On Nations and Globalization—A Philosophical Essay (Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books, 2005), especially 65– 80; Félix Guattari, Chaosmose (Paris: Galilée, 1992); Anne Phillips, Multiculturalism without Culture (Prince- ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2007), 42– 72. 28. Amy J. Elias, “The Dialogical Avant-G arde: Relational Aesthetics and Time Ecologies in Only Revolutions and TOC,” Contemporary Literature 53, no. 4 (Winter 2012): 749– 50. 29. For the concept of potenza, see Antonio Negri, Art and Multitude: Nine Letters on Art, Followed by Metamorphoses: Art and Immaterial Labor, trans. Ed Emery (London, Eng.: Polity, 2011), 30. Maurizia Boscagli translates Negri’s potenza as “strength” in Insurgencies: Constituent Power and the Modern State, trans. Maurizia Boscagli, with a New Foreword by Michael Hardt (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2009). Boscagli’s note on p. 337 defines potenza as “strength . . . resid[ing] in the desire of the multitude.” 30. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, “Imperative to Re- Imagine the Planet,” originally published in Imperatives to Re- Imagine the Planet/Imperative zur Neuerfindung des Planeten, ed. Willi Goetschel (Vienna: Passagen, 1999). Reprinted in An Aesthetic Education in the Era of Globalization (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2011), 335– 50. 31. Spivak, “Imperative to Re- Imagine the Planet,” 348. 32. Ibid., 349. Introduction xxxv 33. See Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, Death of a Discipline (New York: Colum- bia University Press, 2005), 72–7 3. For earlier formulations of this idea, see her A Critique of Postcolonial Reason: Toward a History of the Vanishing Present (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999) and “Imperative to Re- Imagine the Planet.” 34. Neil Turnbull, “The Ontological Consequences of Copernicus: Global Being in the Planetary World,” Theory, Culture & Society 23, no. 1 (2006): 133. 35. Masao Miyoshi, “Turn to the Planet: Literature, Diversity, and Totality,” Comparative Literature 53, no. 4 (Fall 2001): 295. 36. Ibid., 296. 37. Some of these titles include Moraru’s Cosmodernism; Ursula K. Heise’s by now classic Sense of Place and Sense of Planet: The Environmental Imagina- tion of the Global (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008); Wai Chee Dimock’s articles “Literature for the Planet,” PMLA 116, no. 1 (January 2001): 173– 88, and “Scales of Aggregation: Prenational, Subnational, Transnational,” American Literary History 18, no. 2 (Summer 2006): 219– 28 as well as her trailblaz- ing book, Through Other Continents: American Literature across Deep Time (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2008); Amy J. Elias, “Interactive Cosmopolitanism and Collaborative Technologies: New Foundations for Global Literary History,” New Literary History 39, no. 3 (Summer 2008): 705–2 5; Joni Adamson, “American Literature and Film from a Planetary Perspective: Teach- ing Space, Time, and Scale,” Transformations 21, no. 1 (Spring–Summer 2010): 23– 41; Frances Ferguson, “Planetary Literary History: The Place of the Text,” New Literary History 39, no. 3 (Summer 2008): 657– 84; Susan Stanford Fried- man, “Planetarity: Musing Modernist Studies,” Modernism/Modernity 17, no. 3 (September 2010): 471– 99; Caren Irr, “Toward the World Novel: Genre Shifts in Twentieth- First- Century Expatriate Fiction,” American Literary History 23, no. 3 (Fall 2011): 660– 79; Leerom Medovoi, “ ‘Terminal Crisis?’ From the Worlding of American Literature to World- System Literature,” American Literary History 23, no. 3 (Fall 2011): 643–5 9; Mark Poster, “Global Media and Culture,” New Liter- ary History 39, no. 3 (Summer 2008): 685–7 03; Mary Louise Pratt, “Planetary Longings: Sitting in the Light of the Great Solar TV,” in World Writing: Poet- ics, Ethics, Globalization, ed. Mary Gallagher, 207– 23 (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2008); and Min Hyoung Song, “Becoming Planetary,” American Literary History 23, no. 3 (Fall 2011): 555– 73. 38. Ulrich Beck, What Is Globalization? trans. Patrick Camiller (Cambridge, Eng.: Polity, 2000), 9– 10. Otherwise treading carefully, Beck is getting here on a slippery slope toward a notion of the world as fully integrated “totality.” 39. Marshall Brown, “Globalism or Globalization?” Modern Language Quar- terly 68, no. 2 (June 2007): 143. Brown’s definitions can be inconsistent (see, e.g., 137). 40. Roland Robertson, “Social Theory, Cultural Relativity, and the Problem of Globality,” in Culture, Globalization, and the World- System: Contemporary Conditions for the Representation of Identity, ed. Anthony D. King (Minneapo- lis: University of Minnesota Press, 2000), 73. 41. Min Hyoung Song, “Becoming Planetary,” 568. Song draws from Carl Schmitt’s controversial The Nomos of the Earth, Paul Gilroy’s Postcolonial Mel- ancholia, and Hardt and Negri’s three- volume opus on global- era multitudes. xxxvi Amy J. Elias and Christian Moraru 42. Warnier, La mondialisation de la culture, 107. 43. Amanda Anderson, “Cosmopolitanism, Universalism, and the Divided Leg- acies of Modernity,” in Cosmopolitics: Thinking and Feeling Beyond the Nation, ed. Pheng Cheah and Bruce Robbins, 265–8 9, especially 278 and 265 (Minne- apolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998). 44. Ibid., 267. 45. Ibid., 268, 269. Quoting from Bruce Robbins’s Secular Vocations: Intel- lectuals, Professionalism, Culture (New York: Verso, 1993), 181, Anderson notes that cosmopolitanism “enables an embrace of worldliness in two senses: ‘1) plan- etary expansiveness of subject-m atter, on the one hand, and 2) unembarrassed acceptance of professional self- interest, on the other.’ ” 46. Anderson, “Cosmopolitanism,” 267, 274, 276. 47. See Robbins, Secular Vocations, 197; James Clifford, “Traveling Cultures,” in Cultural Studies: Now and in the Future, ed. Larry Grossberg, Cary Nelson, and Paula A. Treichler, (New York: Routledge, 1992), 108; Seyla Benhabib, Situating the Self: Gender, Community, and Postmodernism in Contemporary Ethics (New York: Routledge, 1992), 153; Judith Butler, “For a Careful Reading,” in Feminist Contentions: A Philosophical Exchange, ed. Linda Nicholson (New York: Rout- ledge, 1995), 130– 31; Etienne Balibar, “Ambiguous Universality,” differences 7, no. 1 (1995): 48– 74; and Julia Kristeva, Nations without Nationalism (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993)— all discussed and quoted in Anderson. Our summary here follows her language. For an updated formulation of “agonistic universalism” by Butler, see Contingency, Hegemony, Universality: Contemporary Dialogues on the Left (New York: Verso, 2000) and Dispossession: The Perfor- mative in the Political (New York: Polity, 2013). Also see Benhabib’s Another Cosmopolitanism (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008) for a more recent discussion of the pragmatic ethics of interactive cosmopolitanism. 48. Anderson cites David Hollinger’s Postethnic America; Martha Nussbaum’s “Patriotism and Cosmopolitanism”; and Arjun Appadurai’s postnationalist stance from “Patriotism and Its Futures” (Public Culture 5 [1993]: 411– 29). Hollinger’s distinction between pluralism and cosmopolitanism is particularly important to our discussion. Pluralism endows certain groups with specific privilege and protects culture, while cosmopolitanism has been typically more oriented to the individual and disputes claims to cultural integrity (Postethnic America: Beyond Multiculturalism [New York: Basic Books, 1995], 85–8 6, quoted in Anderson, 278). 49. Shared topics and areas of theoretical concern inform such studies as the transatlantic cosmopolitanism reconstituted by Susan Manning and Andrew Taylor’s Transatlantic Literary Studies (2007), Paul Gilroy’s The Black Atlan- tic (1993), Kwame Anthony Appiah’s Cosmopolitanism: Ethics in a World of Strangers (2006); the contributions to Hemispheric American Studies, edited by Caroline Field Levander and Robert S. Levine (2008); Yunte Huang’s books, chiefly Transpacific Displacement (2002); Paul Jay’s Global Matters: The Trans- national Turn in Literary Studies (2010); Paul Giles’s Antipodean America: Australasia and the Constitution of U.S. Literature (New York: Oxford Uni- versity Press, 2013); and the Spring 2003 Modern Fiction Studies special- topic issue on the “trans-A merican imaginary,” guest-e dited by Paula M. L. Moya and Ramón Saldivar. To be sure, the list could go on. Introduction xxxvii 50. Heise, Sense of Place and Sense of Planet, 50 and following. Heise further develops her eco- cosmopolitan argument in Nach der Natur: Das Artensterben und die Moderne Kultur (Berlin: Suhrkamp, 2010). 51. For an interesting contrast between a focus on rights in the context of globalization, on the one hand, and ethics within the framework of planetary cosmopolitanism, on the other, consult the audio dialogue between Judith Butler and Spivak, “A Dialogue on Global States, 6 May 2006,” Postmodern Culture 17, no. 1 (2006). 52. Susan Stanford Friedman writes in her 2010 article “Planetarity: Musing Modernist Studies” (Modernism/Modernity 17, no. 3 [September 2010]): “As I use the term, . . . planetarity . . . is an epistemology, not an ontology” (494). 53. Bharati Mukherjee, The Tree Bride (New York: Hyperion, 2004), 231. 54. “Heterogenizing” interplays with the global are outlined in Roland Rob- ertson’s concept of “glocalization,” while in “creolizations” the global is further customized, blending into native mixtures more aggressively, and even goes “slumming.” 55. For a posthuman critique of the human- nonhuman hierarchy embedded in classical ecocriticism, see Heise, Nach der Natur, especially 115–4 9. Much has been made recently in ecocriticism of the “Anthropocene era,” Paul Crutzen’s 2002 term for the geologic-c hronological age in which humans radically affect and alter the planet’s ecology; see Jan Zalasiewicz et al., “Are We Now Living in the Anthropocene?” GSA Today (February 2008): 4– 8. 56. See, for example, Spivak’s Death of a Discipline (2005); Emily Apter’s The Translation Zone (2006) and “Untranslatables: A World System,” New Literary History 39, no. 3 (Summer 2008): 581–9 8; Wai Chee Dimock, “Planetary Time and Global Translation: ‘Context’ in Literary Studies,” Common Knowledge 9, no. 3 (Fall 2003): 488– 507. 57. Paul Gilroy, “Planetarity and Cosmopolitics,” British Journal of Sociology 61, no. 3 (September 2010): 620. For “methodological nationalism” and the cos- mopolitan reaction to it, see Ulrich Beck, “Toward a New Critical Theory with a Cosmopolitan Intent,” Constellations 10, no. 4 (2003): 453. On postnational/ post- territorialist aggregation and its role in new literary history, see Wai Chee Dimock’s pioneering articles and books, especially Through Other Continents.  The Planetary Turn 