I n t r o d u c t i o n Beyond Recognition: The Prob lem of Antebellum Embodiment “Am I not a man and a brother?” the eighteenth-c entury abolitionist motto demands. This question is meant to be rhetorical—to indict a blindness to one’s fellow human so obscene that today, as Hortense Spillers notes, it “might be denied, point blank, as a possibility for anyone, except that we know it happened.”1 Indeed, Anglo- American abolitionists regularly diag- nosed slavery as the product of a monumental failure—or deliberate refusal—to recognize the humanity of enslaved persons, and their rhet oric survives t oday in the commonplace assertion that slavery and racism are practices that operate by dehumanization. But while, as the famous aboli- tionist motto suggests, the “question” of Black humanity was undeniably on the line in the debate over slavery, this focus on recognition overlooks the full scope of the strugg le that was pitched on the battleground of the Black body in the antebellum United States.2 In this book, I argue that the ideological strugg le over slavery in ante- bellum Ameri c a was one that contested not just the constituency of hu- manity (who qualifies?) but also the meaning of “the h uman” as such. That is, I suggest that to understand the true stakes of the fight for recognition— and of the ferocity with which that recognition was denied—we must be 1 2 Introduction alert to the fact that the antebellum debate over Black humanity unfolded at a time when the definition of “ human” being was in flux, destabilized by the rise of a newly empirical episteme. At the dawn of the nineteenth century, Western culture had, for centuries, defined human being by con- trast to its material body, identifying the mark of humanity in mankind’s supposedly transcendent freedom from material causality— a moral auton- omy guaranteed by the uniquely ensouled or rational nature of the h uman. Indeed, in the late eigh teenth century, this faith in humanity’s inherent autonomy from nature fueled demo cratic revolutions in the United States, France, and Haiti by underwriting popu lar appeals to mankind’s univer- sal right to freedom. As Michel Foucault argues, however, in this same late eighteenth- century moment a very dif fer ent conception of human being was also beginning to take shape and transform this Western episteme of “Man.”3 As Foucault explains, thanks to a host of newly emerging fields of knowledge dedicated to the empirical study of human life (fields such as natu ral history, biology, ethnology, demography, po liti cal economy, pub- lic health, and statistics), “Western man was gradually learning what it meant to be a living species in a living world, to have a body, conditions of existence, probabilities of life, and individual and collective welfare.”4 In contrast to the humanisms that preceded it, then, this new empirical epis- teme proposed to define h uman being by physical traits— identifying human thought and action with embodied pro cesses rather than by free- dom from such material forces. In the wake of this epistemic shift, Fou- cault writes, “the h uman being begins to exist within his organism, inside the shell of his head.”5 The late eigh teenth century thus marks the onset of a new volatility in the Western conception of the h uman. Just as demo- cratic revolutions began to enshrine the princi ples of liberal humanism, promising to extend rational subjecthood to all man- (and possibly woman-) kind, the burgeoning of empirical discourse was proliferating a new epis- teme that threw humanity’s rational freedom into question. Of course, the rough timeline I have just sketched indicates that this epistemic upheaval would have been already well u nder way by the mid– nineteenth c entury, the period on which this book focuses. Indeed, as studies by Jonathan Kramnick, Alan Richardson, and Justine Murison demonstrate, materialist discourses of mind circulated widely across a range of philosophical, literary, and popu lar outlets in eighteenth- and early nineteenth- century Anglo- American culture.6 But although the queasy co- existence of liberal and biological epistemes was therefore no longer news in the antebellum era, this study proposes that the antebellum moment in Amer i ca nonetheless marks an impor tant point of inflection in the ongo- Introduction 3 ing rearticulation of “the h uman.” In t hese years, the intensifying debate over U.S. slavery triggered a popularization of racial science that charged biological accounts of the h uman with newly explosive po liti cal signifi- cance. As Americans increasingly turned to the body for ostensibly objec- tive empirical proof of the slave’s inherent equality or inferiority, the prob lem of human materiality was thrust to the center of midcentury political— and, as we s hall see, literary— concern. The advent of immediatist abolitionism in the 1830s and the ensuing intensification of antislavery sentiment in the North put mounting pres- sure on proslavery apologists to justify their support for the embattled institution, and in their efforts to do so slavery’s advocates increasingly looked to what we now know as modern, biological racism. By the 1850s, the center of gravity in the debate over U.S. slavery had noticeably shifted from the question of w hether it is morally acceptable to enslave a h uman being toward the question of whether Black bodies should be considered fully human in the first place. Whereas the former question—is slavery humane?—is a moral one referred to the consciences of voting Americans, the latter question— are Black humans really human?— was increasingly understood to be an empirical question “upon which science alone has the right to pronounce.”7 On the face of things, this appeal to empirical analy- sis merely redirects the central question of Black recognition (“Am I not a man and a b rother?”) from voters’ consciences to scientific analy sis. But in fact, as this study contends, this redirection fundamentally alters the stakes of the question at hand. For to refer the question of the Black body’s human- ity to science is to presume that “humanness” is a quality best determined by the sort of features that science is equipped to investigate—it is, in other words, to assume that h uman being is ultimately defined by corporeal (material or empirically demonstrable) as opposed to moral features. Thus the embodied episteme of h uman being implicit in the latter version of the question (is the Black body human?) can be understood to index a broader cultural transformation. If the spike in racial science’s popu lar authority in antebellum discourse suggests an intensification of racist antipathies, it moreover also signals the ascent of a new, materialist conception of the human that brought with it the promise—or the threat—of newly materi- alist, nonhumanistic ethical imaginaries. This study therefore suggests that by the 1850s, the prob lem of recog- nition had subtly but profoundly changed. In this de cade, the strug gle for the recognition of Black humanity opened onto an even more elemental disagreement about the meaning or stakes of that recognition, as liberal and biological epistemes competed to define the nature of h uman being as 4 Introduction such. In light of this epistemic revision, we can begin to see how racism functioned, in the antebellum context, not simply to “dehumanize” Black Americans but moreover to justify indifference to the fact of Black human- ity. For under its empirical redescription, (biological) humanness strictly vouches for a basic physiological commonality across the h uman species that makes no definite claim about the moral equality of all members.8 To recognize a Black body’s speciological humanity, then, need not entail acknowledging her moral equivalence to other h umans (her “full” hu- manity). And thus we underestimate biological racism when we treat it as strictly an exclusionary logic— a rationale for refusing to recognize the humanity of one’s fellow h uman. More radically, the spread of biological racism indexed the advent of an empirical reconceptualization of the h uman which, as the chapters to follow will investigate, posed a variety of acute challenges to the moral significance of h uman belonging and to the con- ception of human being enshrined, at least in theory, in American liberal democracy. Our analyses of the debate over slavery therefore cannot af- ford to stop at the politics of recognition: the fight for recognition pre- sumes the integrity of a liberal humanist conception of the human that was increasingly destabilized by the rise of biological discourse in the late eigh- teenth and nineteenth centuries, and by the new forms of racism that surged out of this empirical turn. Accordingly, Antebellum Posthuman endeavors to think beyond the pol- itics of recognition in an effort to explore the shifting sands upon which recognition’s liberal politics stood in the antebellum era. More specifically, this study w ill endeavor to restore a sense of biologism’s remarkable po- liti cal lability at midcentury— its ideological open- endedness. Against a common critical tendency to treat antebellum biologism as synonymous with biological racism, this study highlights alternative discourses of em- bodiment that disputed racist ideology, charting the emergence of a mate- rialist strain of antislavery thought in the 1850s.9 In chapters on Frederick Douglass, Henry David Thoreau, and Walt Whitman, I show how these authors appropriate the materialist ontology, but not the racist politics, of antebellum racial science, producing an antislavery materialism that rebuts biological racism in its own empirical terms. This strain of antislavery materialism did not amount to an explicit phil- osophical program or po liti cal platform; rather, it surfaced as a leaning or tendency within these authors’ writings in the 1850s as they began to ex- plore new perspectives on h uman identity and community that w ere opened up by embodied discourse. We must, then, keep an ear to the ground for Introduction 5 this incipient refrain. But when we do, the effect is often quite striking because the antislavery materialism these authors develop takes them far afield of some of the most basic liberal princi ples (commitments to human equality, moral freedom, and individualism) for which Douglass, Thoreau, and Whitman are widely remembered as spokespersons, and by the light of which we continue to read their work. This departure from the liberal princi ples t hese authors espouse elsewhere in their writings signals the di- vergence of antislavery materialism from the larger antislavery move- ment: despite the congruity of its antiracist aims with abolitionism, this tentative new strain remains something philosophically distinct. I will be suggesting, then, that “the h uman” was fracturing along at least two dif- fer ent fault lines in the mid– nineteenth c entury. The contest to define the meaning of the human played out not only in the clash between liberal hu- manist and biological discourses of the h uman, but also between pro- and antislavery strains of biological thought that vied to define the po liti cal ethics of this new empirical episteme. Excavating this twofold volatility of the human in antebellum discourse does two impor tant things for our understanding of the politics of embodi- ment in this fraught historical moment. First, by demonstrating that bio- logical essentialisms like racism and sexism were not the only ideologies of embodiment circulating in the nineteenth c entury, antislavery materi- alism reminds us that biologism does not inherently fund discrimination. On the contrary, as these antislavery materialisms demonstrate, biological racism is as much a conservatively humanistic reaction against biologism as it is an expression of biologism’s challenge to humanist princi ples. Bio- logical racism attempts to limit embodiment to subjugated populations, casting Black Americans, Native Americans, and w omen as (in Saidiya Hartman’s phrase) “the ultimate bearers of the bodily.”10 Quite apart from its empirical falsehoods, then, (i.e., quackeries like the suggestion that skull size varies by race), midcentury biological racism departs from strict biologism insofar as the former treats materiality as if it w ere u nevenly distributed among humans—as if some peoples are inherently more and others less embodied, as if we are a species unevenly evolving from apes to angels.11 Seen from this a ngle, biological racism begins to appear antibiological—an attempt to quarantine privileged populations from the illiberal taint of their own materiality. The antislavery materialisms outlined in my chapters contest this differential attribution of embodi- ment, and in doing so help us to disarticulate biologism’s materialist on- tology from ideological encrustations like racism that cling to it. In this 6 Introduction sense, recognizing the diversity of antebellum embodied thought can help to interrupt the reductive cir cuit according to which biologism is presumed to condemn us to fleshy prisons that justify discrimination against us. As it happens, the idea that biological materialism is not inherently es- sentializing and therefore po liti cally regressive informs some of the most exciting new work in critical theory today. Across a range of fields, schol- ars have begun to scout the possibilities for a progressive materialism as they recoil from what have come to seem like the excesses of the linguistic turn— a turn whose emphasis on interpellation and performativity fostered what Stacy Alaimo and Susan Hekman describe as a “flight from the ma- terial” and a foreclosing of “attention to lived, material bodies and corpo- real practices.”12 Recent critical theory has therefore sought to navigate a corrective “turn to the body” by exploring new ontologies that highlight the agency of matter without collapsing into the essentialism, determin- ism, and teleological evolutionism that drove critical theory away from discourses of nature and embodiment in the first place. At the radical end of this pres ent groundswell are revisionary material- ist ontologies that insist upon the constitutive entanglement of mind and body, h uman and nonhuman being, material and cultural forces. For the purposes of this study, I will use the term “posthumanism” to refer to this admittedly heterogeneous set of material ontologies b ecause, although not all of the critics I will refer to under the sign of posthumanism have em- braced this term, it allows me to foreground both the epistemic stakes (the not- humanism) and the historical position (the after- humanism) implied in the ontological shift that they frame.13 Challenging the immateriality of both poststructuralism’s discursively constituted subject and liberal hu- manism’s transcendently autonomous subject, posthumanist materialism pres ents us with an embodied subject whose subjectivity pro cessually emerges from her neural networks and flows of subconscious affect, from relations with nonhuman beings and agencies, and from unpredictable in- teractions between her physiological, material, and cultural environments. Posthumanist theory thus suggests that a truly materialist conception of the human obliges us to relinquish—or at least steeply qualify— Western humanism’s conception of the h uman as an autonomous subject free from physical causality. In doing so, posthumanism erodes the grounds upon which Western humanism has traditionally upheld the innate superiority of the human to all other forms of being. A second advantage, then, of excavating antislavery materialism now is that this antebellum discourse can offer insight into the prehistory of the posthumanist critical turn we are now witnessing. By keeping one eye Introduction 7 on the pres ent (as the deliberate anachronism of my title, Antebellum Posthuman, invites us to do), we may begin to discern the philosophical commonalities that link antislavery and con temporary posthumanist materialisms. As Marjorie Levinson points out, the anachronism involved in such a trans- temporal mode of reading need not be thought of as the enemy of historicism— a license to overwrite the past with the pres ent. On the contrary, Levinson argues, reading “conjuncturally” across time can help us to recover dimensions of the past that have grown closed to us. By using “the knowledges and imaginaries of our own time to summon up par tic u lar pasts,” Levinson proposes, we can make those forgotten histories “flash upon us in ways that neither they nor we could have an- ticipated.”14 Thus, as I hope to show, reading for the resonances that con temporary posthumanist theory elicits from t hese antislavery writings allows the conceptual lability of the human in antebellum lit er a ture to become vis i ble to us in ways it has not been heretofore. But while my chapters on Douglass, Thoreau, and Whitman w ill sug- gest commonalities their materialism shares with con temporary posthu- manism, I am ultimately even more interested in the ways in which t hese antebellum writers can help open up new vistas onto our pres ent theoreti- cal moment. In par tic u lar, I find that reading con temporary theory through the lens of its antebellum precursor helps to focalize one of the most im- perative critical challenges con temporary posthumanist theory currently faces: namely, the con spic u ous absence of race as a critical term in posthu- manist discourse. An increasing number of scholars have begun to voice concern at what Zakiyyah Jackson calls the “resounding silence in the post- humanist, object- oriented, and new materialist lit er a tures with re spect to race.”15 This occlusion of race subtends what Alexander Weheliye has di- agnosed as a more fundamental epistemological exclusion in posthuman- ist theory: its minimization of the centrality of racism to the Western humanist tradition that it proposes to move beyond, and its failure to engage with counterdiscourses of the h uman articulated in nonwhite and non- Western cultural traditions.16 But if race remains largely under- theorized in con temporary posthumanist thought, race and racism are unmistakably at the center of its antebellum pre ce dent. Attending to post- humanism’s prehistory in antislavery materialism can therefore serve as a provocation to reexamine the racial politics and racist po liti cal legacies in- volved in the con temporary posthumanist turn. Examining recent critiques of posthumanism by theorists of race and social justice, my final chapters will assess the considerable strengths as well as the limitations of posthu- manism’s materialist politics. These chapters will outline opportunities for 8 Introduction posthumanism’s more rigorous collaboration with theories of race and social justice g oing forward, as well as highlight philosophical obstacles to this closer alliance with which both posthumanism and materially minded social justice criticism have yet to fully reckon. Thus in addition to highlighting the volatile and contested status of em- bodiment’s politics in antebellum discourse, this study will suggest that reading across the archives of antislavery and posthumanist materialism can help us to sharpen our sense of both, not only by highlighting their commonalities but also by clarifying their angles of divergence. Below, I will offer a very brief overview of the rise of materialist politics in the post- Enlightenment era, charting the contours of the biological turn from the late eigh teenth century to the birth of biopolitics, and offering a fuller account of the posthumanist turn in critical theory t oday. With a clearer sense of what posthumanism is, and of the ideological formations to which it responds, we can better recognize its historical and conceptual continu- ities with the nineteenth- century materialisms of Douglass, Thoreau, and Whitman. Embodiment from Biopo liti cal Racism to Posthumanism When Edmund Burke published his conservative Reflections on the Revolu- tion in France in 1790, his pamphlet triggered a deluge of liberal responses including, most famously, Thomas Paine’s Rights of Man (1791) and Mary Wollstonecraft’s A Vindication of the Rights of W oman (1792). Rather less notably, in 1792 Thomas Taylor published his parodic manifesto, A Vindi- cation of the Rights of Brutes. Citing “ those wonderful productions of Mr. PAINE and Mrs. WOLLSTONECRAFT,” Taylor glibly proposes that their “sublime theory” of h uman equality ultimately points to an even larger moral truth poised to “give perfection to our researches into the rights of things.” This larger truth: “the equality of all things, as to their intrinsic dignity and worth.” Taylor thus proceeds to facetiously argue that universal equality is indeed universal, and o ught therefore to include every thing from nonhuman “brutes” to “vegetables, minerals, and even the most apparently contemptible clods of earth.”17 For the most part, Taylor’s satire of liberal egalitarianism operates by the fallacy of the slippery slope— commoners equal to kings? Women equal to men? What next? But his pamphlet finds its teeth when it subtly con- flates two distinct logics closely associated with the French Revolution: the liberal discourse of human rights and the ontology of radical materialism. This conflation appears in the pamphlet’s opening gambit, where Taylor Introduction 9 defines the disagreement between monarchist conservatives and liberal revolutionaries as a conflict of ontologies—as, in fact, a dispute over dual- ism. Adapting Aristotle, he explains that conservatives believe there is a naturally “slavish part of mankind” comprised of t hose “born with strong bodily and weak m ental powers,” and that this slavish class “ ought to be governed by the in de pen dent [class], in the same manner as the soul governs the body, that is, like a despot or a tyrant.” By contrast, he observes, “this is a conclusion which will surely be ridiculed by every genuine modern, as it wholly proceeds on a supposition, that mind and body are two distinct things, and that the former is more excellent than the latter, though almost every one is now convinced, that soul and body are only nominally distin- guished from each other, and are essentially the same.”18 Taylor thus as- serts that the new materialism abolishes not only hierarchies of the human but also hierarchies of being. For if what was traditionally called the h uman “soul” or “mind” is now taken to be embodied— simply an ef- fect of physiological processes— then this mind’s “ mental powers” are not, in fact, “in de pen dent” of matter but rather enchained to physical causality in the same way as the physical body.19 This means that so- called rational men are not intrinsically more f ree than the “slavish” men and w omen— those (ostensibly) subrational persons defined by their machinic muscles, animal instincts, and organic appetites— over whom they presume to govern. Ex- tending this logic, Taylor insists that, once divested of its transcendental “soul” or autonomous “mind,” humanity ceases to be ontologically excep- tional and therefore can no longer claim to be morally superior to nonhuman beings. Hence Taylor’s conclusion that “genuine modern” (i.e., materialist) philosophy leads to the conclusion “that there is no such thing in the uni- verse as superiority of nature.”20 By his reasoning, there is no such thing as superiority of nature because there is no such thing as superiority to nature. Once we acknowledge that h umans do not enjoy a special exemp- tion from the laws of matter, then we will be in a position to recognize our ontological equality not only with “brutes,” but with “vegetables, minerals, and . . . clods of earth.”21 Ultimately, then, Taylor suggests that “genuine modern” philosophy is self- defeating, that in fact it abolishes the equality its exponents purport to defend. For Taylor, t here can be no ontological freedom in the absence of a corollary category of unfree being called “property” (embodied in wives, slaves, horses, or houses, and fi nally, most fundamentally, in one’s own body).22 Hence, at its grandest and most unsettling, Rights of Brutes maintains that a thoroughgoing materialism is logically incompatible with a rights- based version of the po liti cal: the latter, Taylor proposes, ultimately 10 Introduction depends upon an exceptionalist model of the h uman that the former fatally undermines. Of course, as a critique of Wollstonecraft and Paine, Taylor’s satire misses the mark, for to arrive at his parodic egalitarianism he must first rewrite their liberal position as a materialist one. Nonetheless, the ar- gument of Rights of Brutes remains compelling for the way it highlights the tension implicit in the Enlightenment’s dual (although not always si mul ta- neously held) commitments to liberal and materialist philosophies. At the turn of the nineteenth c entury, then, Western culture sponsored what Taylor suggests are incommensurable epistemes of the human: lib- eral Man defined (in Foucault’s words) “by his freedom, or by the opposi- tion of soul and body,” on the one hand, and empirical Man defined by his body and the economy of his biological interests, on the other.23 But al- though the liberal and empirical figures of Man appear to be incommen- surable in the abstract, in practice, as Foucault argues, their joint appearance at the end of the eigh teenth century produced a reor ga ni za tion of Western politics— the birth of biopolitics— that oversaw their unstable imbrica- tion. Briefly described, biopolitics refers to a subtle but profound recon- ceptualization of state power according to which Western states came to conceive of their citizenry not (or not only) as rights- bearing liberal sub- jects but as an aggregate biological population— a “multiple body” that “cannot . . . be counted” because its life is not proper (not the property of individuals) but rather pro cessual, unfolding across its fluctuating collec- tive mass.24 Accordingly, although long dedicated to maintaining law and order, in the early nineteenth century Western states began to take a new interest in managing the biological pro cesses of populational life, and to this end they began to develop policies aimed not at disciplining individ- ual bodies— punishing criminals, for instance— but at controlling the collective body— regulating rates of health, mortality, reproduction, labor productivity, and the like. In other words, under biopolitics Western states began to conceive of the populace as so many liberal citizens and as bio- capital, a statistical mass life whose biological economies and embodied in- terests can, like any other material resource, be mined and administered for maximum productivity.25 As Foucault details, biopolitics erodes the freedoms of liberal subject- hood by turning the state’s attention from the individual to the popula- tion, even as it insinuates state power ever more comprehensively into the material conditions of individual life. Underscoring this shift, Wendy Brown objects that biopolitics gave rise to a “subject so profoundly inte- grated and hence subordinated to the supervening goal of macroeconomic growth that its own well- being is easily sacrificed to t hese larger pur- Introduction 11 poses.”26 Hartman’s sobering study of the “amazing continuity” between slavery and freedom in the experience of nineteenth- century Black Amer- icans amplifies this assessment by illustrating how the freedom of liberal personhood accorded to Black Americans by the Fourteenth Amendment proved a vastly diminished prize in the wake of biopolitics’ ascendance.27 But as Hartman’s analy sis further demonstrates, if the birth of biopoli- tics threatened the freedoms of the liberal citizen, it moreover also made biological racism insidiously structural to the logic of modern governance. Racism, Foucault explains, is fundamentally “a mechanism that allows bio- power to work.”28 It does so by inscribing “caesuras within the biological continuum of life,” dividing what would other wise be an undifferentiated mass of interrelated material pro cesses (the immanent “biological contin- uum” of life encompassing all being) into life that has been selected to live (“the population”) and life that has been “dysselected”— deemed biologically inferior, degenerate, a risk to the “true” population’s health and purity.29 Biological racism thus distinguishes between types of life that are deemed “fully” h uman and types of life (sub- or nonhuman) that are deemed biologi- cally inferior and even potentially deleterious or infectious— populations that may, or even must be sacrificed in order for the designated population to thrive.30 Far from leveling all distinctions, then (as Taylor perhaps only half- jokingly feared), the ascendance of empirical Man instead funded a power ful new hierarchy of human being. In the eigh teenth and nineteenth centuries, empiricism did not immediately displace prior Western epis- temes of Man but rather fused with and rearticulated them. Thus Sylvia Wynter shows how the advent of the biological discourse of man did not supplant but rather wove itself around preexisting hierarchies of h uman being that had been or ga nized first by Western Chris tian ity and l ater by Western humanism. Reinflecting t hose earlier hierarchies of the human (faithful/pagan, rational/nonrational), biopo liti cal racism recast human in- equality according to an ostensibly empirical distinction between the bio- logically “full” h uman ( those endowed with moral autonomy and value) and the biologically less- than- human, those anatomical humans still en- thralled to their animalistic embodiment.31 In this way, biopolitics brokered a toxic truce between Christian, humanist, and empirical epistemes of the human, all of which would continue to tenuously coexist in the modern era. In contrast to empiricism’s history of collaboration with t hese hierar- chical epistemes, con temporary posthumanist theorists now suggest that, properly understood, biological man is in fact (as Taylor facetiously suggested) incompatible with any system of thought premised upon the 12 Introduction notion of humanity’s uniquely transcendental being. Whereas the West- ern tradition that Wynter outlines presumes that humans—or at least that subset of Homo sapiens deemed “full” h umans— enjoy autonomy from m atter, posthumanists insists that “ human life is embedded in a material world of great complexity, one on which we depend for our continued survival.”32 From this embodied perspective, an organism is never sovereign nor ex- ceptional to nature but rather exists as and through a vast ecol ogy of interdependencies— a “biological continuum” of material flows within the multitude that is the organism, among organic and nonorganic entities, and between the organism and its natu ral, social, and technological environ- ments. But if posthumanism thus limits human freedom by highlighting human beings’ dependence upon nonhuman beings and forces, unlike biological racism it denies that embodiment is strictly deterministic. Post- humanism’s pro cessual ontology is materialist yet irreducibly unpredict- able, premised (as Nigel Thrift eco nom ically puts it) “on the leitmotif of movement in its many forms.”33 Con temporary posthumanist materialism therefore undermines the humanist tradition in two ways. On the one hand, its embodied subject erodes the moral distinction between h uman and nonhuman life. As we have seen, whereas humanism divides life into “the human” (beings un- derstood to be free from material causation, and hence moral actors) and “the nonhuman” (beings, including “subhuman” Homo sapiens, who are un- derstood to be simply embodied), posthumanism rejects this division by maintaining that a human being is like all beings insofar as it, too, is strictly (albeit nondeterministically) constituted through physiological pro cesses, and insofar as its actions are, likewise, “nested in [material] forces beyond its control.”34 In other words, although posthumanism does not deny that there are substantial differences between forms of life (between, say, humans, octopi, and mushrooms), its materialism does highlight the im- possibility of empirically justifying the categorical moral superiority of any one form of life over o thers. Indeed, posthumanism makes categorical distinctions difficult by exploding the ontological closure that is charac- teristic of liberal humanism’s transcendental subject. Emphasizing the “transcorporeal” and “intra- active” interpenetration of human with non- human bodies, posthumanism overwrites the image of the bounded, au- tonomous, and sovereign h uman self with the image of a heterogeneous yet continuous plenum that Roberto Esposito (borrowing from Merleau- Ponty, not Hortense Spillers) terms “the flesh.”35 Thus, as Jasbir Puar ob- serves, posthumanist theory works to “deprivilege the h uman body as a discrete organic thing” by underscoring the fluidity, multiplicity, and Introduction 13 porosity of the embodied self.36 The posthumanist subject is at once em- bodied and yet nonsingular, imbricated by virtue of her embodiment with bodies and environments beyond the border of her skin. In this way, posthumanism not only breaks down the categorical moral difference be- tween human and nonhuman being but moreover denies their physical separateness, highlighting the “vibrant” throng of unexpectedly “ani- mate” nonhuman bodies and forces that subtend and infuse what we call human bodies and agencies.37 This revisionary, nondeterministic materialism has spread across several areas of critical theory in the late twentieth and early twenty- first c entury, becoming a defining feature of the current theoretical moment. It is, for instance, particularly salient in work downstream of Deleuze and Guattari, who coined many of the key terms and topoi that or ga nize con temporary posthumanist discourse. But although the prevalence of materialist ontolo- gies may seem distinctive of the critical landscape t oday, materialism is, of course, on the contrary, an ancient philosophical tradition with a long history in both Western and non- Western thought.38 Moreover, as Fou- cault’s and Wynter’s genealogies emphasize, the epochal rise of empiricism in the late eigh teenth century proliferated materialist discourses of h uman being that predate con temporary posthumanism by two centuries, and which proceeded to crucially shape nineteenth- century politics. We therefore need not be surprised to find precursors to posthumanist materialism haunting the antebellum literary imagination. Whether fig- ured as the transpersonal continuum of “the flesh” or as Whitman’s great, peristaltic “ocean of life,” posthumanism’s vision of being as embodied and entangled may perhaps best be understood as a conceptual tendency nested within the epochal turn to empiricism— “a latency,” as Mark McGurl argues, “within the discourse of the ‘modern.’ ”39 Although post- humanism has only crystallized as a theoretical movement in the last twenty- odd years, and despite its frequent association with distinctly post- modern developments like poststructuralist philosophy and cyborg tech- nologies, its materialism bears no necessary relation to the pres ent day. And if this is so, then the fluid, inclusive, and dispossessive ontology articulated by posthumanists today has a prehistory we have yet to fully explore. Antebellum Posthumanism Toward this historicizing effort, Antebellum Posthuman offers three case studies in antislavery materialisms of the last c entury, highlighting the emer- gence of a proto- posthumanist imaginary within American lit er a ture. 14 Introduction Acknowledging t hese dissenting antebellum materialisms can help us to recognize that the debate over U.S. slavery was not simply a debate over the borders of the h uman, with liberal universalists vying against racist materialists to define who gets included. Instead, this debate also housed an epistemic disagreement over the relation of the human to its embodi- ment, and this study hones in on a strug gle between biologically minded thinkers to define the shape of embodiment’s politics g oing forward. In its simplest terms, my claim is that although racism was by far the most prevalent and consequential form of embodied thought circulating in the antebellum era, it was not the only one: the authors I examine testify to the emergence of an alternative, antislavery discourse of human material- ity and biological collectivism. This is to suggest that the politics of human embodiment did not go without saying in this de cade, and that while many antislavery activists worked to combat the rise of biologism, others w ere working in these years to rewrite its politics from within. My first three chapters profile the antislavery materialisms that Doug- lass, Thoreau, and Whitman began to develop in the 1850s, when racial science had succeeded in making the biology of Black humanity a central feature of the debate over slavery. In each case I examine how t hese au- thors responded to this epistemic shift by adopting their own version of embodied discourse, condemning slavery in the same empirical idiom that proslavery racial discourse was then so powerfully wielding. As I shall dem- onstrate, however, if this reversal allowed Douglass, Thoreau, and Whit- man to answer racist science in its own terms, their antislavery materialism was also unsettling to the liberal demo cratic princi ples and transcenden- tal liberal subjectivity that these authors are other wise known for having championed. In this sense, as I shall argue, their forays into materialist thought led them to frame arguments against slavery that do not neatly align with the liberal po liti cal commitments they express elsewhere, pro- ducing a minor refrain within their writings that speculatively resigns the doctrine of human equality, queries the autonomy of human agency, and explodes the singularity of h uman identity. Although pitched against slav- ery, the antislavery materialism these authors develop cannot properly be called liberal. Tentatively, experimentally, and repeatedly, these authors’ late antebellum works move in strange new directions, framing an alter- native to both liberal universalism and racist essentialism that resonates unevenly, in ways I s hall explore, with posthumanist materialism today. Chapter 1 examines how the rise of racial science spurred Douglass to supplement his moral appeals to human brotherhood with a new antislav- ery argument that bracketed the question of his race’s humanity. As Introduction 15 Douglass perceived, by recasting “the human” as a biological category, racial science was able to suggest that humanity’s embodied diversity indicates a basic moral diversity among humans, making it pos si ble to imagine that not all humans are equally entitled to the same “ human” rights. In the wake of racial science’s rise, then, abolitionism’s insistence on the slave’s shared hu- manity did not carry the same moral weight. Frustrated with the in effec- tive ness of abolitionism’s moral rhe toric at answering biological charges of Black inferiority, and disillusioned by the pervasiveness of racism on both sides of the Mason- Dixon, Douglass began to develop his own alter- native ethnological discourse in the 1850s. Reading across several of Dou- glass’s major and minor writings of this de cade (including “The Claims of the Negro Ethnologically Considered,” “What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?,” and his sole novella, The Heroic Slave), this chapter details how, rather than simply denounce scientific racism, Douglass responded to its growing influence by strategically appropriating its discourse of Black ani- mality. Douglass argues brilliantly and perilously that even if Black Amer- icans were proven to be less rational and more animalistic than white Americans, abolition would remain a pragmatic, if no longer a moral, ne- cessity b ecause even irrational animals inevitably become violent when their instinct for self- preservation is aroused. Thus, ironically embracing the bestialization of Black humans by scientific racism, Douglass rede- ploys this as the basis for a new kind of naturalistic justification of revolu- tionary vio lence. Deliberately evoking and recasting the found ers’ appeals to natu ral law, Douglass argues that re sis tance to violent oppression is not simply a h uman right but an instinct embodied in all biological life. Therefore, he concludes, slavery is not just morally but practically un- tenable: on the wrong side of physical law, it is, he writes, “dangerous as well as wrong.”40 In these late antebellum writings, Douglass explores ways to bypass the stalemate over human equality by strategically reap- propriating racial science’s speciological discourse of the h uman. Chapter 2 traces an analogously materialist reconceptualization of the human in Thoreau’s writings of the 1850s. In this de cade, Thoreau became immersed in empirical studies of ecological succession and speciological development, which spoke directly to the ongoing debate between monog- enist and polygenist racial scientists. Working in the shadow of Harvard’s celebrity naturalist, Louis Agassiz, who was one of the most influential voices in midcentury American science and polygenism’s most erudite ally, Thoreau’s late antebellum naturalism set out to disprove Agassiz’s polyg- enist theory of “special creation” and to substantiate the “developmental theory” of nature (a pre- Darwinian theory of evolution). As I show, 16 Introduction however, while Thoreau engaged with this midcentury discourse of species, he understood its po liti cal significance quite differently from most. Instead of weighing in on the question of racial difference and equality, Thoreau’s late antislavery essays translate his studies of ecological and evolutionary change into a vastly revised theory of po liti cal reform. Rethinking his faith in individual moral conscience, Thoreau began to conceive of conscience as a physiological trait (“a matter of constitution and temperament, after all”) that may be more highly developed in some persons than others.41 In- dividual agency thus begins to recede in Thoreau’s late po liti cal essays as he comes to understand moral judgment as a capacity that is unequally dis- tributed, and unevenly developing, across the h uman population. Accord- ingly, his late antislavery writings suggest that Thoreau had begun to map the politics of abolition onto the inhuman expanses of evolutionary time, imagining that anomalously advanced moral “specimens,” as he calls John Brown, create “the possibility, in the course of ages, of a revolution” in Amer i ca’s po liti cal conscience.42 Against racist biopo liti cal arguments for segregation and fears of miscegenation, Thoreau’s evolutionary politics stress the inverse: not the necessity of deploying politics to prevent white Amer i ca’s biological (and moral) “degradation,” but the inevitability of Amer i ca’s biological (and moral) development by the unelected forces of material history. This inversion— this emphasis on the constitutive priority of sub- or suprahuman biological pro cesses over and against humanity’s power to control them— also haunts the popu lar Spiritualist discourse of bioelectricity which inspired Walt Whitman’s poetry of “the body electric.” Turning to the 1855 Leaves of Grass in Chapter 3, I argue that although Whitman is often credited with inventing a radically new demo cratic aesthetic, his early poetry in fact conjures a nation comprised of porous subjects who bear little resemblance to liberal persons, and who are constituted by material at- tachments that have no place in the voluntaristic landscape of demo cratic contractualism nor the imagined community of white nationalism. Highlighting Whitman’s fascination with the theory of electrical em- bodiment that he encountered in the mid- nineteenth- century Spiritualist press, I show how the bioelectrical subject inspired Whitman to reinvent the lyric subject— that is, both the persona and the propositional subject of the lyric poem—in the first edition of Leaves of Grass (1855). On the bio- electric model of mind, perception is an embodied event: as Whitman puts it, in the moment of perception “ things enter with electric swiftness,” inscribing themselves on the body’s ner vous system and thereby “quiver- ing [it] to a new identity.” In this chapter, I argue that the permeability of Introduction 17 the ner vous body led Whitman to conceive of poetry as an embodied me- dium— a site for the communication not of meanings but of physical con- tact, a means of orchestrating the bioelectrical inscription of the reader. Thus I suggest that Whitman’s perplexingly embodied poetics (his insis- tence, for instance, that we should not read but kiss his poems, or his prom- ise that reading w ill turn our very flesh into a “ great poem”) makes strict sense within his materialist theory of mind. Moreover, just as Whitman’s antirepre sen ta tionalist poetics empties poetry of its meaning, so too it lights up the fictitiousness of bodily identity, exposing the porosity, impression- ability, and historicity of the ner vous self. In place of the bounded and legible liberal subject, then, Leaves of Grass represents the embodied subject as a dynamic and open- ended pro cess, a site— like the lyric poem—of sensuous exchange in which the boundary between the sentient self and its environ- ment cannot be confidently drawn. Whitman’s bioelectrical ontology is thus materialist and yet anti- essentialist— his permeable and networked subjects escape the biological determinism that characterizes so much antebellum racial science. And yet by the same token, as I discuss, liberalism’s basic grammar of po liti cal actors, identities, and interests breaks down in the face of Whitman’s unbounded pro cessual selves. These first chapters endeavor to highlight the proliferation of biological accounts of the human and to examine how these three authors responded to the racist tendencies within midcentury science by constructing dis- courses of h uman materiality that do not support slavery. But if their anti- slavery materialisms are often ingenious, they are also costly to the liberal ideals these authors espouse elsewhere in their writings: leading Douglass, for instance, to bracket his insistence upon human equality, Thoreau to qualify his faith in conscientious action, and Whitman to unwittingly— or perhaps blithely— detonate the lyric/liberal subject into an unfolding pro cess inimical to repre sen ta tion, including repre sen ta tional democracy. All three of these authors therefore speculatively invite us to conceive of the nation as a material collectivity fused as biological continuums are— not by the formal similarity of their constituents, the shared sentiment of imagined community, nor even the abrogable social contract of the Con- stitution, but instead by the dense weave of material mutuality. Thus I suggest that, in their more radical passages of thought, t hese authors draft an image of material community that differs in subtle but consequential ways from some of the richly productive accounts of affective nationalism that have appeared in recent critical lit er a ture. From Christo- pher Castiglia’s study of “the federalization of affect” in the early republic to Peter Coviello’s account of race as a language for inciting feelings of 18 Introduction “inborn connectedness” among strangers in the antebellum era, recent critical analyses of the prob lem of nation- building in the nineteenth century have highlighted the importance of affective attachments as a vi- tal supplement to the power of legal instruments to bind the nation to- gether.43 Against this vision of sympathetic or imagined community, the authors I examine describe a nation bound, first and foremost, by material attachments: by physical dependencies and mutual vulnerabilities that con- join the population regardless of how its members feel about one another, which is to say, despite the ideological or affective rifts that might other wise divide the population by differences of belief or (race, sex, class, or even species) identity. In shifting our attentions from intentional and sentimen- tal attachments to involuntary material intimacies, t hese three antebellum authors anticipate con temporary posthumanism’s emphasis upon the ways in which h uman life and politics are complexly entangled with diverse “publics” of nonhuman beings and agencies. My purpose in identifying commonalities across nineteenth- and twenty- first- century materialisms is, however, not simply to discover post- humanism avant la lettre. More urgently, I think that the materialist poli- tics that Douglass, Thoreau, and Whitman experimentally develop can help us to confront deep and still unanswered questions about the desir- ability or even viability of a posthumanist politics. Today, posthumanist theorists often suggest that their materialist ontology helps us to envision a more radically inclusive and egalitarian liberal politics. Posthumanism lights up the way to a “parliament of t hings” or “democracy of objects,” preparing us for a f uture in which “the scope of democ ratization can be broadened to acknowledge more nonhumans in more ways, in something like the ways in which we have come to hear the po liti cal voices of other humans formerly on the outs.”44 The proto- posthumanism we encounter in Douglass, Thoreau, and Whitman likewise appears to be progressive and po liti cally inclusive, at least within the context of their slaveholding era. And yet, as my readings w ill underscore, t hese authors’ materialism is also illiberal, so thoroughly corrosive to the fiction of autonomous individ- uality that it obliges us to rethink the tenets of liberalism (including indi- vidual rights, freedom, and equality) at very basic levels. Both then and today, posthumanism’s materialist ontology challenges us to envision a world without discrete persons, “a world populated not by active subjects and passive objects but by lively and essentially interactive materials.”45 But what would a politics without persons even look like? And how could a poli- tics premised on such a liquefying ontology address, let alone redress, demands for racial, gender, sexual, or speciological equality? Introduction 19 My fourth chapter examines the tension between posthumanism’s illib- eral ontology and its avowedly liberal politics by highlighting an absence that has, I suspect, particularly enabled this tension to go unaddressed: namely, the occlusion of race as a critical term in posthumanist theory. Indeed, in this re spect, con temporary posthumanism arguably still has much to learn from its antislavery precursors insofar as racism and the dis- course of social justice w ere defining features of the historical conditions of the latter’s emergence. On this cue, Chapter 4 seeks to recenter the ques- tion of racial identity and human difference for posthumanist materialism by reading con temporary posthumanist theory through the lens of con- temporary discourses of social justice. Here I survey some of the most tren- chant current critiques of posthumanism’s blind spot for race and for the critical tradition of thinking about the politics of embodiment in postco- lonial, indigenous, critical race, and social justice theories. In addition to examining the correctives these studies offer to posthumanist theory, I am particularly interested in highlighting possibilities for collaboration be- tween posthumanist and social justice criticism g oing forward. To this end, this chapter stages a conversation between con temporary posthuman- ism and Wynter’s postcolonialist critique of Western humanism, which anticipates key features of posthumanist thought while also insisting upon racism’s centrality to humanism’s construction of the h uman. Exploring these two theories’ congruencies, I argue that posthumanism’s proj ect is clarified and refined by a closer engagement with Wynter’s theory of so- cial justice, and that both discourses are strengthened through collabora- tion. At the same time, as my Coda takes up, this comparative work also raises difficult questions about the po liti cal and ethical limitations of a rig- orously (i.e., philosophically self- consistent) posthumanist materialism. It is thus my wager that reading antebellum and con temporary materi- alist politics through one another can teach us something new about both. On the one hand, our current fascination with the ontology of embodiment can help to make us more attentive to the ontological speculations of antebellum authors. In this regard, this proj ect’s contribution to the field of antebellum literary study does not have to do with canon expansion (clearly, my authors are squarely canonical) but, rather, involves rereading known authors in ways that may be estranging to our assumptions about them. Moreover, by emphasizing the epistemic volatility that nineteenth- century biologism introduced, this proj ect seeks to unsettle the humanis- tic assumptions according to which this canon has been assembled and read up to now. We have been too ready, I think, to read Douglass, Thoreau, and Whitman as mouthpieces for the humanistic princi ples of liberal 20 Introduction democracy and expositors of “the age of the first person singular” that Em- erson so confidently pronounced.46 In neglecting the materialist turn of their late antislavery thought, we risk oversimplifying the epistemic stakes at play in the debate over slavery, and hence underestimating the scope of slavery’s legacy in the postbellum world. At the same time, the urgency of catching up to t hese antebellum authors’ sense of the dense imbrications of po liti cal and material systems only continues to grow more distinct for us t oday amid the gathering threat of ecological change. Indeed, politics after the biological turn may well challenge us to re- think our assumptions about the correlation between freedom and exis- tential well- being. Although the Declaration of In de pen dence insists that liberation is a matter of disentanglement— stating that we must “dissolve the po liti cal bands which have connected [us] to another” in order to as- sume a truly “separate and equal station”—it may be that, g oing forward, we will find ourselves tasked to embrace our relationality, which is in any case inescapable. Instead of championing freedom as a blanket princi ple, then, the pursuit of happiness t oday may oblige us to reimagine emanci- pation as something that does not follow from breaking bonds so much as from rearranging them, finding ways to be immersed and intertwined dif- ferently, with an eye toward the contingency, fragility, and irreducible collectivity of embodied life. In that spirit of interdependence, I want to acknowledge that this proj- ect’s exploration of antislavery materialism is indebted to the work of a number of critics whose proj ects have enabled my own. For instance, this book aims to affirm and extend recent efforts to document the prolif- eration of embodied discourse across nineteenth- century lit er a ture. In par tic u lar, Justine Murison’s elaboration of the “open, vulnerable, and fraught” embodied self codified in early ner vous physiology (in The Politics of Anxiety in Nineteenth- Century American Lit er a ture), and Jane Thrailkill’s account of the “interanimation of the h uman mind and body” in postbel- lum scientific and literary works (in Affecting Fictions), both richly illumi- nate the challenges that embodied accounts of the human posed to liberal conceptions of subjectivity.47 Building upon these studies, I aim to spot- light the centrality and volatility of embodied discourse in the U.S. debate over slavery and racial equality which, I submit, served as a kind of cul- tural lightning rod to focus literary attention on discourses of h uman em- bodiment while at the same throwing their po liti cal consequences into sharper relief. In this sense, I hope to contribute to recent efforts to trace the historical emergence of biopolitics through its reflection and contes- tation in nineteenth- century literary imaginations. Like Kyla Tompkins Introduction 21 and Colleen Glenney Boggs, I situate the antebellum discourse of em- bodiment within the history of biopolitics in order to explore the antebel- lum body’s po liti cal ambivalence— the way in which it was si mul ta neously used to construct and, elsewhere, to deconstruct the distinctions (white/ Black, human/nonhuman, self/other) that nineteenth- century biopolitics sought to police.48 And in highlighting the ways in which this deconstruc- tive tendency seems to prefigure con temporary posthumanist theory, I am preceded and inspired by Matt Taylor’s and Mark Noble’s investigations of proto- posthumanist materialisms that crop up across lit er a tures of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.49 Toward those efforts, I hope that Antebellum Posthuman’s historical focus on lit er a tures of the 1850s can add to our growing appreciation of posthumanism’s prehistory by refram- ing the crisis of slavery and the question of racial difference as a catalyst for materialist discourse in the United States. If the ascent of the embod- ied subject at midcentury gave rise to new racist and biopo liti cal regimes, it also, I submit, precipitated the emergence of a new, proto- posthumanist materialism that indelibly transformed literary imaginaries in its wake. 