THE FIRST DIRECTIONS IN THINKING- There is little at stake as to what is taught young children for a time, provided they are sufficiently interested to appreciate the facts one by one, to notice them definitely, to think about them clearly. Games of action interest little people best, will hold their attention most closely. They will dramatize stories with keenest relish. The highest test of what you are accomplishing with them can be made through giving directions for their action. Directions for games should be illustrative at first, but you have really done little for them until you can give directions for a new game, or describe a new dramatization of a story and have them do what is expected or desired. In this there can be no concert work at first. One by one the directions should be given to the children. Always choose one of the slowest chil- dren, and let the others volunteer to tell what is wrong. If slow children are told one by one, all will understand it in a few minutes, and then all can do it together. Never have any concert work by voice or action so long as any of the children fail to know just what to do and how to do it. The difficulty should increase a little every two or three! days. Little children should have class work with the teacher most of the time. Two hours a day is known to be as long as it is worth while to keep children in school until they are six or possibly seven, years of age. They should be able within a year to do ¿nany things definitely, exactly, on time and in time. It is important that everything is known from different points of view, that it can be done under different conditions. Often teachers thoughtlessly allow a child to stand always on the right (or left) side of a mate in an exercise, or in various ways associate knowledge with dress, position, or other conditions. This should be skilfully guarded against. All knowledge of single facts should have a personality, an individuality. AMERICAN AGRICULTURAL EDUCATION. ^ It is an interesting fact that the United States is in advance of all the nations in planning for specific instruction in agriculture and allied subjects. It took many decades to bring it up to its present en- viable position in this matter. It was a tedious task to overcome the indifference of the farmer and of Congress. But it succeeded, and now its insti- tutions and courses of study command the atten- tion of the world. To Michigan belongs the honor of being the first of the states to found an institution for pro- moting technical training in agriculture. It was written into the constitution of the state, which was adopted in 1850. Seven years later it organ- ized an agricultural college near Lansing, with five professors and sixty-five students. This pioneer institution was soon the cynosure of all eyes, and many other states followed Michigan's example. The Morrill act passed Congress in 1862, under President Lincoln's regime, and by its provisions large tracts of the public lands were given the sev- eral states to aid in the establishment of colleges to teach agriculture and the mechanical arts. About $11,000,000 were made available by the sales of these public lands. That same year a department of agriculture was formally organized as a branch of the national government. This department has been of the highest service in promoting the interests of the American farm, and has been sustained by liberal appropriations from Congress. Nearly $6,000,000 was the grant in 1905. The secretary of agricul- ture has charge of the diffusion of valuable agricul- tura^ information among the people. The library of this department is "probably the most complete collection of agricultural and technical scientific lit- erature in the world." Its 90,000 volumes and pamphlets are freely circulated among agricultur- ists and scientists throughout the country. In 1904 over 12,000,000 copies of pamphlets were dis- tributed to public libraries and farmers. New and valuable seeds and plants are also distributed freely as called for. i j i At present there are sixty-five institutions throughout the country giving instruction in agri- culture. In twenty-one states these colleges are de- partments of the state universities. In fifteen states and territorities separate institutions are maintained for the colored race. The courses of study differ greatly, being from a four-years' course issuing in a degree to a post-graduate course, or a brief special course. Some colleges have correspondence courses, much like those of Chautauqua. The range of subjects is very wide, including ^ agronomy, horticulture, animal and poultry raising, ^ cheese and butter making, sugar raising, and many others. Nearly 60,000 students were pursuing these courses in 1904. These institutions^ vary widely in their curricula but they seem naturally to fall under three general Ôctofccr I$Õ6 JOTJKXAÍi ÕF EDXJCATÌOH 45 i types: (1) Those with courses in agriculture only, (2) those who in connection with agriculture teach the mechanic arts, and (3) those that form a part of universities. Examples of these types are found in the Massachusetts Agricultural College at Am- herst, the Iowa State College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts at Ames, and Cornell University at Ithaca, N. Y. Hampton Institute in Virginia, arid Tüskegee Institute in Alabama have excellent courses for colored students. There are also fifty-six experiment stations scattered over the country and its insular posses- sions, where researches and experiments are made with plants, animals, soils, waters* manures, etc. Many of the experiments have resulted in a con- siderable and valuable increase in agricultural knowledge. Reading courses for farmers were inaugurated by the state college of Pennsylvania in 1892, and this has resulted in the formation of many farmers' clubs for study. Illinois took the initiative in organizing clubs for boys to study farming, and this plan has spread to several other states. About 850,000 were enrolled in these adult and juvenile clubs in 1904. The nature-study leaflets of Cor- nell University have become famous, and have an almost world-wide circulation. Many lectures are given in rural communities, and they fill a long-felt want. The latest thing in this line is the lecture bureau on wheels. Eminent professors make a railway tour and address the as- sembled! crowds from a siding. This is deservedly popular, and has already resulted in a large increase in crops. The corn crop of Iowa has been im- mensely enlarged by this itinerant lectureship. THOREAU. Henry D. Thoreau, who died jat forty-five years of age, had little reason to expect that his fame would steadily grow so that within fifty years of his death his |would be one of the charmed names in American literature, as it certainly is to-day. Nor did he ever care for popular appreciation. His poem "Inspiration" closes with these lines: - "Fame cannot tempt the bard, Who's famous with his God; Nor laurel him reward Who has his Maker's nod." It has been my privilege to refer in public lec- tures during recent months to several American authors, and it is entirely clear that interest in Thoreau is as keen, to say the least, as in any other author, past or present. In his lifetime but two volumes of his were published, and those with much delay and difficulty in finding a publisher. Since his death, at least ten other volumes of his writings have been issued, and at least four very considerable biographies. His every manuscript, fugitive bit of writing, even his familiar letters have been eagerly sought by publishers, who give the classical setting. There is no more fascinating author to study than Thoreau, and no phase of the study is more delightful than is to be found in his' 'Familiar Let- ters."* These letters reveal the man in his friend- I/e'ter? of Henry David Thoreau." edited with an intro- Bostón *$1 60 Frank B. Sanborn. Houghton, Mifflin & Co., ships, which were an especial feature of his life. The side lights are thrown upon Whittier, Haw- thorne, Longfellow, Lowell, Emerson, the Chan- nings, Walt Whitman, Horace Mann, Theodore Parker, Wendell Phillips, Alcotts - Bronson and Louisa M., John Brown, Beecher, Margaret Fuller, Thomas Wentworth Higginson, the Hoar brothers, James G. Birney, Thomas Carlyle, Samuel J. May, George Herbert, Josiah Quincy, Moncure D. Conway; George William Curtis; Henry James, Lucretia Mott, J. C. Fremont, Frank B. Sanborn, E. P. Whipple, Horace Greeley, Ed- ward Everett Hale, and Francis Parkman. No single book will lead orie into the charmed circle of New England from 1845 to 18G2 more de- lightfully than this in which I have been revellirtg once more this autumn. •►. .». » PENSIONING TEACHERS IN PENNSYLVANIA. The Pennsylvania teachers have begun a Cam- paign for the passage of a law which shall pension all teachers on half the average salary of the last five years of service, provided they have taught at least thirty years, the last twenty of which was in the public schools of the state. Maryland has a law closely akin to this, and if the Keystone state can get such a law it is likely to become general throughout the country. Charles Emery Smith of the Philadelphia Press calls attention to the fact that such action would necessitate a change in the state constitution. Of course the courts would have to decide this. Pennsylvania has found a way to get around the constitution, and the firemen have been pensioned fon a long time. Let us hope that the plucky and indomitable educational forces of the state will find a way for the state to pension the teachers. COMEDY OR TRAGEDY? Boston has a condition of things that cannot be appreciated in all of its relations in other cities. Boston ļias been arranging for a million dollars' worth of high and normal school buildings in the beautiful Fens district near Simmons College and the Harvard five-million-dollar medical college buildings. Three buildings are provided for: One for the city normal school, one for the training school for this normal school, one for the Girls' Latin school. But, alas, no one seems to have thought that the beautiful Fens do not raise children, and that a training school is impossible without children, hence one elegant new building is useless - for its proposed use. But, again, there is a new commercial high school for boys with two hundred young men at the start, and as many more a year hence - ultimately six hundred, and all can be accommodated in the training school" building. Noble thought. Popular school, no money for its housing, good building all provided for. But, once more, the introduction of 200, 400, or 600 young men into the quadrangle with as many beautiful high school girls! ! Banish the thought. What next? What is to be done with the build- ing? What is tobe done with the boys? Is it comedy or tragedy? 452 JOURNAL OF ElXtXCATlÖlSr October 2$, 1906 VOTING CONTESTS. The Boston board of education has issued an edict that teachers cannot be contestants in any voting schemes. We do not take issue with the board in this, for there are objections to it, but we can but register our regret that this is deemed necessary, for literally thousands of teachers in the United States have enjoyed luxurious tours who would not have had them but for the enterprise of daily and weekly papers. The teaching force of the country as a whole is much the richer for it. Nor is this all. Every child whose interests have been enlisted, whether his teacher wins or loses, has keen relish for every bit of news about the tour, and gets a lot of geography from a new point of view. There are serious objections, and these have won, so that they need not be chronicled. COST OF MEDICAL INSPECTION. Arlington, Mass., has daily inspection of pupils at a cost of $30 per 1,000 inhabitants. Winchester, with inspection but once in ten days, costs $23; Walthan, twice a week, costs $22.70 ; Boston, daily, $17 ; Cambridge, daily, $16.40 ; Marlborough, $14.20; Milton, upon call from teachers, $11.30; Andover, upon call from teachers, $10.50. These figures show the need of more intelligent action in such matters. INDUSTRIES AT GEORGE JUNIOR REPUBLIC. The trades for the boys at the George Junior Republic are farming in all of its departments, car- pentering, printing, plumbing, furniture manufac- turing, shoemaking, laundry work, bakery work, and the government positions; for the girls, - domestic work in all of its departments, millinery, dressmaking, and the government positions. As soon as a child arrives at the Republic, he or she must secure employment. They are paid for their labor in the George Junior Republic aluminum currency, and from what they earn must pay all of their expenses,- poll tax, board, clothing, laundry bills, etc. A banking system is carried on, the "citizens" depositing their money in the usual man- ner, and paying their expenses by checks on the Citizens' bank. THE HOME FOREVER. "The American home is the best place in which a boy can be educated, and the American mother is the best teacher," said Dr. Woods Hutchinson of Redlands, Cal., at the thirty-first annual meet- ing of the American Academy of Medicine at Bos- ton. "If we must take our choice of a playground without a schoolhouse, or a schoolhouse without a playground, let us by all means have the play- ground. Home study among tschool children should not be tolerated. The American boy is the best educated because he spends so much time at home." - Dr. Pierre Janet, professor of experimental psy- chology at the College de France, Paris, and direc- tor of the psychological laboratory of the Sal- petriere, is giving a course of lectures at the Har- vard Medical school, on "The Classical Symptoms of Hysteria." There are to be fifteen lectures, and they are given in English. The lectures are given in the Administration building on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays in the afternoon. They are open to teachers and students of all Bos- ton medical schools, to all physicians and teachers of psychology, and to advanced students of this subject, who are recommended by their teachers to the dean of the Harvard Medical school. There is no charge for admission to the course. New Bedford has been sensible in choosing an outside educator as adviser of the building com- mittee in connection with the new $350,000 high schoolhouse, Principal Charles S. Chapin of the Rhode Island normal school having been selected to pass upon the plans and upon other .details in connection with the building. To struggle against age is weakness, to use it is noble. It was 'Browning Who said : - "Grow old along with me! The best Is yet to be, The last of life, for which the first was made." In the year from July 1, 1905, to June 30, 1906, Boston had two entirely distinct boards of educa- tion and three superintendents, as many as in all her experience prior to 1904. President G. Stanley Hall of Clark University seems to have been more highly honored educa- tionally in Europe than any other American col- legian. Here's hoping and believing that Dr. Henry Houck will be triumphantly elected Secretary of Internal Affairs in Pennsylvania on November 6. The Chicago board of education can furnish more space filling for the "daily papers than any other board of education has ever done. New York and Philadelphia have the same per- centage of defective sight, from 28 to 30 per cent. Chicago reports 35 per cent. That teacher serves the children well who by any means leads them to read literature from a love of such reading. Those who plead for the privilege of using the rod in emergencies would be the first to oppose flagellation. Thrashing is a thing of the past in the school- room, and there will never be any more of it, law or no law. Lynn, Mass., joins the honor class, having raised the salaries of all her teachers within a year. There are more promotions in the profession than ever before, and they are to be more and more. A college merely furnishes opportunities for a young man with brains and purpose. Teachers were never so in demand as to-day.