c h a p t e r 1 Douglass’s Animals: Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality “We hold t hese truths to be self- evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among t hese are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.” It is no secret that the liberal revolution these words seem to promise— affirming the basic pol itic al equality of all humans—w as not, and arguably still has not been realized in the nation t hese words helped to envision. The truths the Declaration of In de pen dence finds so glaringly “self- evident” are, in fact, far harder to make out in the text of the U.S. Constitution, which cre- ates some h umans only three- fifths equal, and in the voting laws of the early republic, which rendered most Americans something less than equal by imposing sex and property requirements on the franchise. Today we tend to describe this inconsistency as the product of hy poc- risy: despite professing egalitarian princi ples, the found ers in fact held rac- ist and sexist prejudices that allowed them to justify disenfranchising so many Americans. The l egal history of U.S. voting rights, however, sug- gests a slightly more complicated story, for the initial justification for lim- iting the franchise in the early republic in fact did not depend upon a notion of biological inferiority. It was, instead, not u ntil the wave of demo cratizing 23 24 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality reforms in the early to mid– nineteenth c entury that the doctrine of natu- ral in equality became necessary to the justification of voter exclusion. Thus ironically—or something worse—it was an upsurge in the egalitarian sentiment that “all men” really ought to mean all biological humans that helped to crystallize the dehumanizing discourse of modern biological rac- ism that this chapter will explore. Despite the revolutionary liberal rhe toric of the Declaration, the laws of suffrage in the early United States remained largely unchanged from the colonial period and thus reflected the more conservative po liti cal ethos of British republicanism.1 On this theory, voting is not a natu ral human right because rationality— the precondition for po liti cal suffrage—is not an inalienable trait of all humans. Instead, republicanism holds that ratio- nality is a faculty that may be enabled or disabled by one’s financial condi- tion. Owning property gives one a rational stake in the nation— “a permanent common interest with, and attachment to, the community,” as George Mason puts it in the V irginia Declaration of Rights (1776). By con- trast to the landed man’s rational interest, John Adams suggests, “Men who are wholly destitute of property” are as “dependent upon o thers . . . as w omen upon their husbands or children on their parents” and thus are not in a position to exercise the “good judgment” of “in de pen dent minds.”2 The property restrictions on voting in the early republic thus implied that, whether or not all h umans have a capacity for reason, the power to exercise that rationality is contingent upon the ideological freedom conferred by economic in de pen dence. On this eighteenth- century view, then, limiting the franchise to propertied men did not specifically entail denying the hu- manity of nonvoters; instead, the prevailing republican logic presumed that humanity, alone, is not a sufficient qualification for full po liti cal personhood. All this began to change in the first half of the nineteenth c entury, when a wave of demo cratic reforms across the states reduced or overturned the property requirements for suffrage. “Stated simply,” Alexandar Keyssar re- flects in his comprehensive history of U.S. voting rights, “more and more Americans came to believe that the p eople (or at least the male p eople— ‘ every full- grown featherless biped who wears a hat instead of a bonnet’) w ere and o ught to be sovereign.”3 The extension of the franchise to nonproper- tied white men in the early nineteenth century thus not only expanded voting rights; crucially, it rearticulated their justification. The new laws rejected the notion that rationality is a power contingent upon freehold property: as one Virginian scoffed, the old arrangement was “ludicrous” in that it effectively proposed “to ascribe to a landed possession, moral or Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 25 intellectual endowments.”4 Instead, t hose endowments w ere presented as a speciological endowment characteristic of humanity (hence the tongue- in- cheek taxonomic reference to “featherless biped[s]”). The new demo- cratic doctrine unequivocally held “that e very man has a right to vote, simply because he is a man.”5 In the wake of this reconceptualization of the justification for suffrage, remaining restrictions on the vote posed a con spic u ous philosophical prob- lem. For if the right to vote derives from a rationality that is inborn in all speciological humans, then to deny a class of persons the right to vote is tantamount to denying their humanity. It is therefore, of course, no mere coincidence that the U.S. abolitionist and feminist movements w ere both born at this moment in the early nineteenth c entury. In 1829, at the crest of this wave of demo cratizing reforms, David Walker penned the opening salvo of what would become the radical abolitionist movement, citing the demo cratic promise of the Declaration and challenging white Americans to “tell me if their declaration is true— viz., if the United States of Amer- i ca is a Republican Government?”6 Two years l ater, inspired by Walker’s example, William Lloyd Garrison likewise invoked the Declaration to call for “the immediate enfranchisement of our slave population.”7 In making their appeals, Walker and Garrison exposed a contradiction in the demo cratizing spirit of the age that slavery’s defenders found them- selves suddenly pressed to justify. Over the ensuing three de cades, a wide variety of proslavery arguments would circulate, but none w ere more ef- fectively calculated to deny Black equality while preserving the demo- cratizing impulse of the era than those that asserted the innate, biological inferiority of Black humanity. If the expansion of the franchise had affirmed the po liti cal equality of all biological men, t hese new proslavery arguments set out to prove that not all biological men are biologically equal. Accord- ingly, in the 1840s and 1850s the po liti cal exclusion of slaves— like that of women and Native Americans— increasingly came to be justified biologi- cally. The proliferation and popularization of racial science in t hese de- cades thus marks an impor tant shift in the debate over slavery: what had begun as a debate over whether the enslavement of h umans is morally ac- ceptable increasingly became a debate over whether Black humans were, biologically speaking, fully h uman to begin with. To be sure, racist and misogynist prejudices w ere hardly new in the 1830s. The biological arguments that circulated in this era did not invent the idea of innate inferiority, but they did reinvent it by transposing it into empirical language and legitimating it with the stamp of scientific author- ity. Thus, as the historian Mia Bay argues, although racism may have been 26 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality old, scientific racism— “a rationalized ideology of Black inferiority”— was a relatively recent invention which gave racial discrimination an unpre ce- dented air of objectivity and cultural authority in the antebellum era.8 Sci- entific racism was an outgrowth of racial science, which emerged in the eigh teenth century as a field of inquiry that proposed to apply the meth- ods of natu ral history to the study of the human species. As we s hall see, racial science housed a number of competing theories over the years, not all of which w ere overtly racist—or, more accurately, all of which w ere rac- ist to dif fer ent degrees and in dif fer ent ways. But under neath this internal diversity, racial science was unified in its assumption that h uman identity is conferred biologically, and that our moral and cognitive characters are essentially embodied traits. From its earliest beginnings, racial science pro- pounded the notion that “the intellectual man is inseparable from the physical man; and the nature of the one cannot be altered without a corre- sponding change in the other.”9 The increasing centrality of race as a justification for slavery— and thus the increasing centrality of racial scientific discourse to both pro- and antislavery argumentation in the late antebellum era—is a significant his- torical development. In this chapter, however, I will argue that to under- stand the full impact that racial science had on the American po liti cal imaginary, we must also look beyond the role it played in racist defenses of slavery. For even more profoundly, as I s hall argue, the biologism im- plicit in racial scientific discourse ( whether pro- or antislavery) presented a potentially fatal challenge to the then still novel liberal ideals of universal human rights and equality. In place of the abstract and uniform figure of Man typically invoked in liberal demo cratic discourse, biologism draws attention to our embodied diversity: empirically speaking, no two persons are the same. Seizing upon the fact of diversity, racial science concluded that humanity, or Homo sapiens, is in fact fractured into a variety of distinct taxonomic subtypes. Regardless of w hether it was being used to bolster or to dismantle racist prejudice, then, racial science forwarded a newly bi- ological conception of the human that erodes the universalizing imagi- nary enshrined in liberal politics. From this new embodied perspective, belonging to the human race no longer ensures one’s basic similarity nor, therefore, one’s basic equality with other members of the species. This chapter investigates this crisis in the meaning of “the human” by tracing its effects on the remarkable transformation of Frederick Doug- lass’s antislavery thought during the de cade or so of racial science’s ascen- dancy in antebellum discourse. In the late 1840s and 1850s, Douglass reinvented his stance on slavery. Parting ways with the Garrisonian abo- Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 27 litionists and abandoning their platform of disunionism and pacifism, he made new alliances in New York, throwing his weight into electoral politics and his money into his newspaper and John Brown’s armed re sis tance. Among the myriad factors that contributed to his transformation, I high- light Douglass’s growing sense that the b attle for freedom must not only be a campaign against slavery but against racism and the pernicious ideol- ogy of Black inferiority that midcentury ethnology was then fortifying. As an example of how the growing influence of racial discourse altered anti- slavery argumentation, Douglass is a fascinating case not b ecause his re- sponse to racial science was typical, but because it was not. Douglass’s writings of the 1850s show him to not only have sensed the importance of being able to frame his antislavery argument “ethnologically” (as a num- ber of con temporary Black writers had begun to do), but to have also been keenly alert to the steep costs associated with d oing so. In his response to racist science, Douglass refutes Black inferiority on ethnological grounds but seems to recognize that simply by acknowledging racial difference— even if just to deny its po liti cal significance—he is weakening his case for human equality. “Let it once be granted that the human race are . . . naturally dif fer ent in their moral, physical, and intellectual capacities,” he ruefully observes, “and a chance is left for slavery.”10 As I shall argue, Douglass solves this prob lem by developing a new strain of argument against slavery that is materialist yet not racialist—an argu- ment that, speculatively and at great po liti cal hazard, brackets the ques- tion of Black humanity and embraces the materiality and animality of the human. This difficult argument emerges intermittently across Douglass’s writings of the 1850s and sits uneasily alongside his continued affirmation of Black humanity and racial equality. It becomes particularly loud in his prophecies of an imminent racial conflict, whose vio lence, as I shall dem- onstrate, he proleptically justifies by portraying this as the natu ral and ineluctable expression of a universal biological instinct for self- preservation. In these moments, Douglass invokes a rhe toric of assertive Black “man- hood” that is paradoxically animalistic, proposing that Black Americans can best demonstrate their humanity through acts of physical re sis tance that Douglass consistently compares to the violent re sis tance of animals. Indeed, as I will demonstrate, the comparison to animals allows Douglass to pres ent racial uprising as not only natu ral but, because natu ral, inevi- table—if the intolerable conditions of Black life in Amer i ca do not change. Thus just when it would seem to have been most urgent to disavow all comparison to nonhuman animals, Douglass begins to think more consis- tently through them, and it is my contention that he does this not in spite 28 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality of but b ecause of the rise of racial science and the dehumanizing discourse of Black animality it fostered. Recognizing the ways in which racial sci- ence’s materialism erodes the epistemic assumptions under lying appeals to human rights and equality, Douglass develops a rearguard defense against this new onslaught, framing an antislavery argument that is strategically agnostic toward the “question” of his race’s humanity. As it diffusely takes shape in his late antebellum writings, this new strain of antislavery think- ing depicts the systematic oppression of Black Americans as a moral crime that is, moreover, a mounting national liability: a practice that is “danger- ous as well as wrong.”11 Although he by no means abandons his moral op- position to slavery, Douglass’s late antislavery writings supplement that moral critique with a new strain of thinking that works from a logic of risk rather than wrong. Tactically engaging racial science’s biological recon- ceptualization of the h uman, Douglass experiments with a new, material- ist antislavery argument that is indifferent to the question of the slave’s—or anyone else’s— humanity. Racial Science’s Challenge to H uman Equality By 1850, racial scientific accounts of Black inferiority had become deeply woven into the fabric of the proslavery position, providing a seemingly au- thoritative rationale, coolly removed from the subjective chaos of moral sentiment, for the wisdom and justice of slavery.12 Proslavery ethnologies suggested that Black Americans w ere, at best, innately dependent h umans (like women and children), and perhaps even not quite human: “A man must be blind not to be struck by similitudes between some of the lower races of mankind . . . [ and] the Orang- Outan,” write the authors of Types of Mankind.13 This racist science was answered by antislavery ethnologies, many written by prominent Black thinkers, that decried this bestialization and fought to establish the full humanity of the Black race. To appreciate the true scope of the impact that racial scientific discourse had on the slav- ery debates, however, we must look beyond this antebellum strug gle be- tween pro- and antislavery ethnologies. As crucial as it was to empirically discredit racist science’s attempts to dehumanize and bestialize Black Americans, the very fact that this was a debate between racial sciences— that, in other words, racial science had become a vital new battleground in the debate over slavery— was itself consequential. For, as I shall elaborate below, quite apart from its po liti cal usages, the materialist logic of racial science fundamentally challenges basic assumptions of humanistic ethics and liberal democracy. To understand the po liti cal significance of racial Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 29 scientific discourse, then, we must learn to recognize how, from the be- ginning—in its basic conceptual premises, which became more explicit over the course of its historical development— racial science undermined Enlightenment notions of universal human rights and equality. The field of racial science was born when eighteenth- century natu ral historians began to apply their empirical and taxonomizing procedures to the study of humans. Racial science was, in this sense, an attempt at reflex- ivity: much as the word “race” had originated as a term of art in sixteenth- century animal husbandry before migrating to its usage in humans, the discipline of racial science originated out of a taxonomizing science origi- nally developed to systematize and instrumentalize the nonhuman world. Racial scientists proposed to study humankind as a species like any other animal, endeavoring to enumerate, describe, and account for the c auses of embodied diversity. By its very premise, then, racial science undermined the categorical distinction between humans and animals. Humanism differentiates the human from the animal by positing that h umans are uniquely in posses- sion of a moral quality (reason or soul) that marks humanity’s exception- ality to nature— its in de pen dence from its animal body and freedom from the chains of physical causality. By contrast, natu ral history restricts its inquiries to physical phenomena, and from this strictly empirical perspec- tive, as the eighteenth- century godfather of taxonomy, Carl Linnaeus, observed, there is hardly “a distinguishing mark which separates man from the apes, save for the fact that the latter have an empty space between their canines and their other teeth.”14 Linnaeus proposed to sidestep the incom- mensurability of humanism’s doctrine of human exceptionalism and natu- ral history’s commitment to empirical evidence by suggesting that the question of humanity’s moral nature “belongs to another forum” than natu ral history, a deferral he signals in his landmark volume, Systema na- turae (1775), by suspending his taxonomic system at the human, refusing to identify this species by any distinguishing physiological marks. Instead, he designates humankind by the curious epithet, Homo nascem te ipsum (“Man know thyself”)— a singularly recursive construction that Giorgio Agamben reads as a nod to the aporetic logic at the heart of Western hu- manism, the circularity by which humans do not prove but simply assert their moral and ontological exceptionality to animal life. But if Linnaeus thus foresaw and sought to deflect a confrontation between empirical and humanistic discourses of humankind by suspending the former, eighteenth- century racial scientists w ere not so cautious and forged ahead with their speciological rearticulation of humanity. 30 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality In doing so, they were developing a discourse that not only undermined the doctrine of human exceptionalism and natu ral rights but moreover re- made the logic of human equality. In natu ral history, as Linnaeus reminds us, facts are determined by observation: what makes this five- pointed body human and that five- pointed body starfish is a matter of distinguishing physical marks, anatomical forms, and other mea sur able traits. In order to qualify as true by the standards of scientific authority, propositions like the doctrine of human equality therefore had to be empirically verifiable: the equality of one person to another had to be a demonstrable, mea sur- able “fact.” Accordingly, as Winthrop Jordan observes, “From the facts of natu ral history, [racial science] spoke for an equality among men which derived from their corporeal sameness. . . . M en had been created equal by the Creator, yes, but the evidence for this creation now lay in man’s physi- cal being.”15 In other words, natu ral history’s empirical episteme demanded that h uman equality be manifest: equality could not inhere in a strictly in- ward and disembodied h uman trait—an unobservable soul or rational freedom— and still count as true. Thus instead of arguing for a universal moral equality or shared h uman nature, racial scientists sought to ground the doctrine of h uman equality in demonstrable physical likeness. Seeing is believing. As equality migrated from an inward to an outward trait, the corporeal diversity of human bodies consequently became freighted with unpre ce- dented significance. As Irene Tucker argues, empiricism’s “demand that universalism be not simply a po liti cal aspiration but something that might be experienced” caused the vis i ble attributes of persons— and most especially skin color—to take on po liti cal import as a sign of a person’s categorical likeness (or not) to o thers in the po liti cal body.16 That racialist ideology was on the rise in the West in the same historical moment when demo- cratic and antislavery sentiment was spreading can seem like a glaring hy- poc risy, or at least evidence of a conservative retrenchment against the Enlightenment’s liberal ideals.17 But Tucker’s point is that, however anti- thetical they may seem, abolitionism and racialism are equally logical outcomes of the Enlightenment, expressing its commitments to liberal universalism and the empirical method, respectively.18 The necessity of em- pirically confirming human equality made physical diversity fraught with po liti cal meaning to a degree it had not been before. And thus, previously negligible to the question of h uman likeness, material embodiment— and more particularly, the infinite diversity of bodies— now posed a power ful obstacle to liberal universalism. Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 31 This impasse, however, was not fully apparent before Douglass’s day. In the eigh teenth and early nineteenth centuries, the reigning paradigm in racial science, termed “environmentalism,” worked to reconcile physi- cal diversity with human equality by asserting the latent empirical like- ness of all h umans. This theory held that all h umans descend from a single ancestral stock (an idea called monogenism), and that this original h uman race diverged as humans dispersed across the globe and came under the influence of dif fer ent climatological and social circumstances. “The pli- ant nature of man is susceptible of many changes from the action of the minutest causes,” Samuel Stanhope Smith explains in his Essay on the Causes of the Variety of the Complexion and Figure in the H uman Species, “and t hese causes habitually repeated through a sufficient period of time, can create at length, the most con spic u ous differences.”19 Environmentalism was not antiracist: its expositors generally described racial diversification as a pro- cess of degeneration from the original and ideal racial standard embodied in Eu ro pe ans.20 However, the same scientists also proposed that the pro- cess of racial degeneration could be reversed— that nonwhite races w ere capable of reverting to the original, ideal form of humanity (could quite literally turn white) through changes in climate and education.21 By treat- ing racial differences as secondary acquisitions superimposed over an orig- inal and inalienable (if only virtual) empirical sameness, eighteenth- and early nineteenth- century environmentalism finessed the tension between embodied diversity and human equality. This uneasy détente fell apart in the nineteenth c entury, when environ- mentalism increasingly lost ground to more rigidly essentialist theories of race. The first wave of the new ideology arose in conjunction with romantic philosophy, at one step removed from the discipline of natu ral history, which celebrated the distinctiveness of dif fer ent races and national volk. Like environmentalism, romantic racialism believed racial differences to be the product of adaptations to local climate and culture; however, it tended to view these differences as irreversible once acquired, and deeply determinative of personal identity. The fixity of race in romantic racial the- ory thus revoked environmentalism’s notion of a latent human unifor- mity; however, romantic racialists generally did not use the permanence of racial difference as an excuse for erecting a divinely ordained hierarchy of h uman races. “ There was in fact some tendency to celebrate diversity, as showing the richness and plenitude of the h uman spirit,” George Freder- ickson notes.22 The result was a discourse that was not aggressively racist, although it was essentializing and often patronizing—as, for instance, when 32 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality George Catlin enthuses over “the proud yet dignified deportment of Nature’s man” in his Letters and Notes on . . . the North American Indians (1841), or when Moncure Daniel Conway praises Black Americans for bringing “an infusion of this fervid African ele ment, so child- like, exuber- ant, and hopeful.”23 As these ste reo types attest, even absent overtly racist intentions, romantic racialism codified a new view of race that was much more difficult to reconcile with a universalizing discourse of “the human.” Transforming race from a reversible acquisition to a permanent identity determined by deep biology, romantic racialism ushered in a new era of racialist thinking in which, as Frederickson describes it, conversation increasingly tended “to start from a common assumption that the races differed fundamentally.”24 This new aesthetic of difference paved the way for a much more aggres- sively racist strain of racial science known ( because its leading expositors published in Amer i ca) as the “American school” of ethnology. In 1839, at the tail end of a de cade of increasing racial conflict in the United States (with the passage of the Indian Removal Act in 1830 and its brutal imple- mentation thereafter; Nat Turner’s Rebellion in 1831, Black Hawk’s war in 1832, the Amistad mutiny in 1839, the organ ization of the immediatist abolitionist movement and underground railroad, and the galvanization of their proslavery opposition), Philadelphia physician and naturalist Samuel George Morton published Crania Americana, a craniometrical study of the indigenous peoples of North and South Amer i ca. Morton’s work inaugurated the American school of racial science by reviving a lesser eighteenth- century racial theory known as polygenism. Unlike monogen- ism, polygenism holds that the human races were created separately, con- stituting originally distinct and unrelated populations. “Each Race was adapted from the beginning to its peculiar local destination,” Morton asserts in Crania Americana; “In other words . . . the physical characteristics which distinguish the dif fer ent Races are in de pen dent of external causes.”25 The American school’s case for polygenism relied heavi ly on Morton’s craniometrical research as well as the work of the renowned Swiss- born Harvard naturalist, Louis Agassiz (on whom more in Chapter 2), and American Egyptologist George Gliddon. More unusually, American school ethnology was aggressively promoted to lay audiences by nonscientists, including the savvy propagandist Josiah Nott, as well as John Van Evrie, George Sawyer, and Samuel Cartwright. The American school’s polygenist brand of racial science gradually gained ground through the 1840s, but it was with the publication of Nott and Gliddon’s Types of Mankind in 1854— a monumental compendium of Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 33 polygenist ethnology— that its thesis reached a new apogee of popularity. Despite Types’ cumbersome eight hundred pages and even heftier $7.50 price tag, this lavishly illustrated volume sold out in four months and went through ten editions by 1870.26 Drawing from a smorgasbord of anatomi- cal, zoological, archaeological, and philological research, and liberally quoting from the work of other prominent ethnologists (both polygenist and not), Types gathered evidence that “mankind is divisible into distinct species” and that “the differences existing between the races of men are of the same kind as the differences observed between the dif fer ent families, genera, and species of monkey or other animals.”27 Nott and Gliddon thus explic itly denied that the slave is “a man and a brother”; instead, they ar- gued that “the human race” is a misnomer, obscuring a much more atten- uated taxonomic real ity. By 1860, this polygenist thesis had won impor tant converts among the shapers of Southern opinion, including editors of De- Bow’s Review and Southern Quarterly Review, John C. Calhoun, James Henry Hammond, and Jefferson Davis. At midcentury, racial scientific discourse in the United States was thus a heterogeneous yet consequential free- for- all. Scientifically, polygenists and monogenists disagreed over the nature of h uman origins. Among themselves, environmental and romantic monogenists further disputed the nature of racial difference, debating w hether racial characteristics w ere fixed or mutable, and whether interracial mixing was physiologically pos- si ble and, if so, w hether it was so cio log i cally desirable. Theologically, all sides laid claim to biblical authority. (Although monogenists had an easier time of this, given the congruence of their vision of humanity’s single ori- gin with the doctrine of Adamic descent, many polygenists also worked hard to prove that the theory of separate h uman creations accorded with Scripture.)28 But what is most perplexing, these competing biological and bio- theological arguments w ere attached to a strikingly fungible range of po- liti cal ideologies. To be sure, polygenism had very strong ties to proslavery politics (Douglass estimated that “Ninety- nine out of every hundred of the advocates of a diverse origin of the human f amily” w ere proslavery apolo- gists).29 Polygenists certainly came the closest to claiming that Black and Native American p eoples constituted distinct and inferior species of hu- manity taxonomically closer to the animal life over which the biblical God granted Adam’s descendants dominion.30 For this very reason, however, many proslavery advocates decried polygenist science. To men like George Fitzhugh, whose defense of slavery turned on its being a benevolently patriarchal system more humane than Northern capitalism’s brutally 34 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality impersonal “wage slavery” (Southern “slavery protects the weaker mem- bers of society, just as do the relations of parent, guardian, and husband,” he insisted), polygenism’s literally dehumanizing thesis was anathema. “It encourages and incites brutal masters to treat negroes, not as weak, igno- rant, and dependent brethren, but as wicked beasts without the pale of humanity,” Fitzhugh objected.31 Meanwhile, that polygenists were likely to be proslavery does not mean that monogenists w ere not. As nineteenth- century racial science had in- creasingly come to perceive race as a deep and permanent feature of iden- tity, monogenism became increasingly consistent with patriarchal proslavery ideologies like Fitzhugh’s (think, for instance, of Moncure Conway’s praise for the “child- like” exuberance of the African race). Proslavery racial sci- ence thus also encompassed monogenist theories like that of the Reverend John Bachman, whose treatise on The Doctrine of the Unity of the H uman Race insists “that nature has stamped on the African race the permanent marks of inferiority,” rendering this race inherently dependent beings, like women and children.32 As tracts like Bachman’s prove, monogenist “unity” pres ents no necessary impediment to proslavery politics, affirming Nott and Gliddon’s claim that “the doctrine of unity gives no essential guarantee of universal liberty and equality.”33 Indeed, what Nott and Gliddon seem to recognize is that racial science’s challenge to the doctrine of human rights does not turn on the question of h uman origins (shared or separate) but rather inheres in racial science’s antagonism to the idea of a shared human nature. Increasingly and across the board, nineteenth- century racial discourse moved away from eighteenth- century environmentalism to portray race as a fixed and determining fea- ture of moral identity— indeed, as Bay has shown, even Black ethnologists in this era (whom I will discuss below) assigned transhistorical characters to the races, reifying race as a meaningful marker of moral difference. This emphasis on human diversity emptied the category of “the human” of moral significance: instead of indicating a fundamentally shared moral es- sence, humanity now functioned as a speciological designation that guar- anteed a baseline morphological, but not moral, similarity. From this perspective, the differences between polygenist and monogenist racial sci- ences recede: w hether h uman races represent dif fer ent species of h umans or simply dif fer ent va ri e ties of a single species starts to look like a taxo- nomic squabble of minor po liti cal importance. For, either way, midcentury racial science seemed to reveal that t here simply is no universal “ human nature,” nor any “ great fundamental laws of humanity to which all h uman passions and h uman thoughts must ultimately be subject.”34 Thus if poly- Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 35 genism seemed to suggest that the slave was not, in fact, “a man and a brother” to white Americans, monogenism suggested that the fact of the slave’s humanity might, after all, be moot, since to be recognized as a human in the new empirical dispensation now only specified a nominal bio- logical likeness that made no claims about your moral endowments. To be speciologically human did not guarantee your equality with other h umans and thus did not vouchsafe your entitlement to the same h uman rights. But though it is fair to conclude that antebellum racial science was more overtly racist than eighteenth- century racial science, in another sense what we are seeing is not simply the rationalization of racial prejudice but the belated unfolding of the incommensurability of empirical and liberal demo- cratic discourses of the human. As I have argued, racial science’s empirical epistemology precludes it from asserting an essential moral equality that is not also materially mea sur able. Given that, from a strictly materialist perspective, mea sur able equality is impossible (no two bodies could ever be empirically identical), the materialist outlook of racial science (of any stripe) necessarily throws the liberal assertion of human equality into doubt. In this sense, racial discourse reverted to the hierarchical view of “the human” enshrined in the republican doctrine and voting laws of the early republic, which likewise represented the human race as unevenly capable and hence unequally qualified for po liti cal rights. Over and above the debate between monogenists and polygenists, then, the under lying shift to an empirical discourse of “the h uman” enshrined in all strains of racial science undermined demo cratic arguments for uni- versal equality and human rights by disabling the logic according to which those arguments operate. Across the spectrum of its po liti cal affiliations, racial science’s biological conception of the human was transforming what it meant to recognize someone as human. Transposing “the human” from a moral to a taxonomic designation, racial science’s empirical epistemology destabilized the liberal demo cratic conception of humanity, exploding the latter’s abstract uniformity into an embodied diversity and placing humans in an ontological continuum with nonhuman life. The rationale for equality and human rights— the idea that “all men are created equal”— once again rested on ideologically shifting sands. Antislavery Ethnology: Douglass Responds Given the difficulty of aligning racial science with liberal humanistic doc- trine, it makes sense that many antislavery advocates simply refused to engage with it. Leading abolitionists like Garrison, Theodore Weld, and 36 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality Wendell Phillips remained staunch humanists through the 1850s, reject- ing the invidious distinctions of race. “Convince me that liberty is not the inalienable birthright of e very h uman being, of what ever complexion or clime, and I will give [the Declaration of In de pen dence] to the consuming fire,” Garrison pronounced in 1854, the year Types of Mankind was pub- lished.35 For these abolitionists, human equality is a right endowed by the exceptional yet unobservable moral value that is inherent in all h umans irrespective of race, gender, or other features of h uman embodiment. And yet, for all its ideological purity, this principled indifference to racial distinctions became a liability to the antislavery cause. Like it or not, racial science was increasingly central to the debate over slavery in the years leading up to the Civil War. Surveying the landscape of proslavery argu- ment in 1861, one Southerner wryly observed that the case for slavery was now being made “theologically, geologically, oryctologically, paleontologi- cally, archaeologically, chronologically, genealogically, orismologically, philologically, etymologically, zoologically, osteologically, myologically, ethnologically, psychologically, [and] so cio log i cally.”36 Here was an arsenal of empirical and quasi- empirical discourses to which abolitionism’s moral platform had no way to directly respond. When men such as Josiah Nott demanded evidence of human equality, asserting that “numerous attempts have been made to establish the intellectual equality of the dark races with the white; and the history of the past has been ransacked for examples, but they are nowhere to be found,” abolitionists like Garrison could not provide proof without abandoning their moralistic high ground.37 This abstention cost them, Frederickson argues: “The inability of the abolitionists to ground their case for the Black man on a forthright and intellectually convincing argument for the basic identity in the moral and intellectual aptitudes of all races weakened their ‘strug gle for equality’ and helps explain the per sis tence of racist doctrines a fter emancipation.”38 But of course, that invoking humanity’s “inalienable birthright” or in- nate moral essence no longer constituted an “intellectually convincing ar- gument” for human equality was precisely the prob lem. If equality must be empirically demonstrated to be compelling, then liberal humanism has already lost crucial ideological ground. In this sense, racial science’s influ- ence worked to disable Garrisonian- style abolitionism’s primary rhetori- cal strategy, moral suasion. For once moral standing is understood to inhere in a being’s embodied attributes or capacities, testing and mea sure ment become the only sure ways to decide how a being ought to be treated. Hence, as the phi los o pher Cora Diamond argues, the idea “that what is involved in moral thought is knowledge of empirical similarities and differences” Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 37 deflects us from the work of examining our consciences and the prompt- ings of moral sentiments such as sympathy, compassion, pity, and love.39 Instead of consulting our hearts, we are tasked with analyzing the marks and features of the other—an empirical proj ect in which, as Dana Nelson and Kyla Schuller point out, sentiment is banished as irrelevant if not mis- leading, replaced by a “male sensibility” that is embodied in the disciplined sensuality of empirical methods, privileging purity, professionalism, and self- control.40 As racial science’s cultural authority grew, it threatened to moot moral suasion by suggesting that the question of whom or what de- serves our full sympathy is a topic “upon which science alone has the right to pronounce.”41 The rapid ascendency of racial scientific discourse in the late 1840s and 1850s may thus help us to account for Frederick Douglass’s dwindling faith in moral suasion in these years. As we know, his ideological and po liti cal stance underwent a transformation between 1847 and 1851, during which time he moved to Rochester, founded a newspaper, the North Star, began to associate with James McCune Smith and Gerritt Smith of the Liberty Party, and fi nally broke with the Garrisonians by publicly proclaiming the U.S. Constitution to be an antislavery document. From this point forward, he renounced the Garrisonian platform of disunionism to throw his weight into electoral politics, and he abandoned their pacifistic commitment to moral suasion to embrace an increasingly fiery rhe toric of racial uprising— words he backed up with deeds by providing material support to John Brown. To many observers both then and today, Douglass’s foray into po- liti cal and even militant antislavery circles has seemed like a concession to expediency— a calculated betrayal of his lofty humanistic ideals.42 In his 1899 biography of Douglass, Charles Chestnutt somewhat apologetically accounts for this de cade by explaining that Douglass was not above “sub- ordinating the means to the end.”43 But if it is the case that the Garrisonians retained the moral high ground, as we have just seen there is also evidence to suggest that lofty arguments were losing traction against racist prejudices that w ere, with the help of midcentury racial scientific discourse, luxuriating in the light of newfound cultural authority. By 1850, a fter two de cades of abolitionist appeal, the number of slaves in Amer i ca had doubled, and the passage of the Fugitive Slave Law made the likelihood of emancipation seem to be, if anything, on the wane. Moreover, by this time Douglass’s personal experience of freedom had also been soured by the racism he encountered in the North— prejudice he experienced even among his Anti- Slavery Society colleagues, and which became all the more evident to him after his sojourn in Ireland 38 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality and G reat Britain, where he noticed that, for the first time in his experi- ence, “no delicate nose grows deformed in my presence.”44 Thus though Douglass certainly did not cease to believe that slavery is morally abomi- nable, he does seem to have concluded, as Marianne Noble suggests, “that moral sense was evidently so overwritten by racist ideology that it was not useful in the fight for justice.”45 As Douglass became convinced that Amer- i ca would not be free u ntil racism was defeated, he repositioned himself to fight not only for emancipation but also for racial equality, and in d oing so he seems to have realized that moral suasion alone would not defeat the ideology he was up against. Indeed, Douglass watched the rise of racial scientific discourse closely and with growing alarm. A fter the publication of Types of Mankind in 1854, he was sufficiently convinced that “Messrs. Nott, Gliddon, Morton, Smith, and Agassiz” were now being “duly consulted by our slavery propagating statesmen” that he felt compelled to respond to their science directly.46 He did this in the form of an address entitled “The Claims of the Negro Eth- nologically Considered,” delivered at Western Reserve University in Au- gust of that year (in what was also the first U.S. commencement address given by a Black American speaker).47 The public demand for a transcript of this speech was apparently clamorous enough that Douglass ventured to republish his text as a pamphlet— a move that also indicates how cen- tral biological discourse had become to the discussion of slavery, and how urgent it now seemed that slavery’s opponents be able to frame their case “ethnologically.” Indeed, in his opening remarks, Douglass justifies his topic by remarking that science was now established as a crucial arbiter of racial politics. “The relation subsisting between the white and Black p eople of this country is the vital question of the age,” he writes, and “in the solu- tion of that question, the scholars of Amer i ca w ill have to take an impor- tant and controlling part.”48 In writing “Claims,” Douglass was contributing to a tradition of Black American ethnographic writing that stretched back to the late 1820s.49 Well before racial science had become a lynchpin of proslavery discourse, Black activists, editors, ministers, and men of science had become aware and alarmed by racial science and “felt compelled to disprove, rather than dismiss, even the earliest, tentative arguments for Black inferiority made by white Americans.”50 Thus, for instance, two de cades prior to the for- mation of the American school of ethnography, John Russwurm, an edi- tor of Freedom’s Journal, decried craniological speculations that the Black race was endowed “with faculties l ittle superior to the tribe of the Ourang Outangs,” and forms “something between man and brute creation.”51 Re- Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 39 sponding to similar accusations in 1837, Hosea Easton ruefully observed, “What could better accord with the objects of this nation with reference to Blacks than to teach their little ones that a negro is part monkey?”52 Against such bestializing racial theories, Black ethnological writers con- structed counterarguments that blended aspects of eighteenth- century environmentalism with romantic racialism. Men such as Russwurm, Easton, Henry Highland Garnet, and James Pennington argued that Black Americans suffered “an intellectual and physical disability or infe- riority” that was directly caused by the “damning influence of slavery.”53 However, once emancipated, they argued, Black Americans would be free to develop the unique characteristics that are truly endemic to their race. These “true” characteristics w ere typically understood to include intellectual gifts, as demonstrated by the genius of ancient Egyptians and Ethiopians, who “astonished the world with their arts and sciences.”54 “The world now would be in a heathenish darkness, for the want of that infor- mation which their better disposition has been capable of producing,” Easton writes.55 The race was also understood to be naturally endowed with a particularly Christ- like moral temperament, a capacity for long- suffering endurance that contrasted sharply with “the love of gain and the love of power,” which were understood to be “the besetting sins of the Anglo- Saxon race.”56 “Nothing but liberal, generous princi ples, can call the energies of an African mind into action,” writes Easton, who looks forward to an age, after the “continual scene of bloodshed and robbery” that has characterized the era of white dominance, in which Africa’s sons will naturally “take the lead in the field of virtuous enterprise, filling the front ranks of the church, when she marches into the millennial era.”57 Whereas the extant character of the Black race in Amer i ca was under- stood to be the product of social conditioning, these latter intellectual and moral endowments w ere understood to be expressions of the race’s natu- ral and permanent character; this blend of environmentalist and romantic racialist rationalization typifies the Black ethnological tradition that Douglass inherited. In taking up ethnological discourse, these men sought to do what the Garrisonians would not: refute racist science on its own empirical terms. But if their adoption of ethnological discourse helped to challenge the cul- tural authority of proslavery science, their strategy did not come without price. On the one hand, as Bay notes in her masterful study of Black eth- nography, the effort to combine environmentalism with romantic racial- ism produced an inherently contradictory theory of racial difference. “By assigning transhistorical characteristics to the races, African- American 40 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality thinkers seemingly undercut their own environmentalist explanations of human differences,” Bay explains.58 This ambivalence might itself be seen as a symptom of a more basic prob lem: simply engaging in racialist dis- course required Black writers to concede to the notion of racial identity, reifying the idea that racial differences fragment human likeness, making the princi ple of human equality more difficult to uphold. Hence Bay sug- gests that Black ethnologists were, “to some degree, ensnared by the idea of race even as they sought to refute racism’s insult to their humanity;” as she argues, Black ethnology’s “arguments for difference and equality w ere beset by some of the same difficulties contained in the late nineteenth- century white segregationist doctrine of ‘separate but equal.’ ”59 Given this logical difficulty, it is not surprising that some Black activ- ists called for racial separatism, invoking the romantic idea that nations had to be racially homogeneous. In the same year Douglass wrote “Claims,” Martin Delany published his manifesto of Black nationalism, “The Po liti cal Destiny of the Colored Race on the American Continent,” announcing that “we are not identical with the Anglo- Saxon,” and arguing that Black Americans must therefore emigrate elsewhere: “A people, to be free, must necessarily be their own rulers.”60 For Delany, however, racial segregation is only a temporary solution to the prob lem of h uman difference; ulti- mately, he anticipates an apocalyptic future showdown between the world’s races, “upon which must be disputed the world’s destiny,” and in which “ every individual will be called upon for his identity with one or the other” race.61 Controversial though it was, Delany’s antagonistic separatism of- fered a solution to the logical tension between difference and equality by doing away with the latter. The larger context of Black ethnological writing and the prob lems it faced prepares us to recognize just how nuanced Douglass’s self- positioning is in “Claims.” If Douglass was determined to answer racist science on its own terms, he nonetheless seems to have been acutely aware that d oing so meant conceding vital ground in the strug gle for h uman equality. At the same time, he was also determined to stave off Black separatism (a policy he did not endorse), which meant that he would have to navigate an alter- native route through the internal contradictions of the Black ethnological tradition. Juggling his ambivalence t oward racialist discourse and his com- mitment to a multiracial Amer i ca, Douglass constructs an argument in “Claims” that is curiously double- voiced. The bulk of the essay sets out to refute the dehumanizing theory of polygenism by putting forward a fairly conventional environmentalist defense of racial unity. In these principal sections of “Claims,” Douglass marshals archaeological and physiological Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 41 evidence to support the thesis that the world’s existing racial lineages con- verge in ancient Egypt and that their subsequent divergence reflects “the effect of circumstances upon the physical man.”62 And yet, at the outset of the essay, Douglass signals his wariness of the ideological concessions that this kind of ethnological argumentation wrings from him. Indeed, if the main body of the essay offers an environmentalist defense of human unity (along with occasional assertions of racial distinctiveness), its opening and closing remarks introduce a countervailing, speculative strain of thinking that trenchantly queries the assumptions that underpin the racialist d iscourse the main body takes up. In other words, “Claims” manages to si mul ta- neously deploy and detonate racial science. Bracketing— even preempting— the essay’s central argument, Douglass’s framing remarks embrace racial science’s embodied conception of the human only to challenge the notion that embodiment has anything to teach American politics. In his opening remarks, Douglass invites us to ask what the assignation “ human” means in the first place. As he points out, the question at hand is really two: before approaching the question of humanity’s multiple or “common ancestry,” he must first address the question of “the manhood of the Negro.” In the effort to prove that he is “a man,” Douglass admits he finds himself immediately at an impasse: “I cannot . . . argue; I must as- sert.”63 This impulse to assert his humanity by fiat rather than empirical demonstration echoes Linnaeus’s designation of the h uman as the being who must recognize itself as such (Homo nascem te ipsum). Linnaeus arrives at this aporetic self- reference because he recognizes that what we mean by the human when we invoke it in humanistic discourse is ultimately a matter of moral rather than empirical judgment and thus belongs “to another fo- rum” than natu ral history. But if man is therefore the animal that recog- nizes itself as not- animal—if human life is that which deems itself morally exceptional to animal life— Douglass is also aware that self- nomination is a privilege that has been revoked for members of his race. His own asser- tion of his humanity is thus rendered inadmissible by the racism that pre- sumes him to be subhuman until proven other wise, obliging him to first “establish the manhood of anyone making the claim.”64 This catch-22 forces Douglass to seek other means of demonstration be- sides assertion, and so he gamely proceeds to review the criteria according to which humanists have historically distinguished h uman from animal kind. “Man is distinguished from all other animals, by the possession of certain definite faculties and powers,” he reminds us, including the power of self- recognition: “Men instinctively distinguish between men and brutes.” But here Douglass’s argument again threatens to collapse, for having named 42 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality the ability to instinctively distinguish between human and animal as a characteristic mark of the human, he proceeds to point out that “The horse bears [the Negro] on his back. . . . The barnyard fowl know his step. . . . The dog dances when he comes home, and whines piteously when he is absent. All these know that the Negro is a MAN.” Douglass offers this animal testimony as proof of his humanity, “presuming that what is evident to beast and to bird, cannot need elaborate argument to be made plain to men.” But the irony of this evidence is as rich as it is paralyzing. For, on the one hand, one cannot help but notice that it is “brutes” rather than “ humans” that here demonstrate the capacity to “instinctively distinguish between men and brutes.” By the classical criteria Douglass has just re- hearsed, these animals are therefore more reasonable— more human— than racist Americans, who have come to rely on specialized sciences to tell them what every barnyard animal already intuitively knows. But in a further irony, t hese animals’ testimony to Douglass’s humanity is inad- missible for the same reason that he has already recognized his own is— because of its presumed animality. Douglass’s effort to distinguish himself from an animal thus manages to reify the categorical moral difference between men and animals even as it si mul ta neously demonstrates the log- ical indefensibility of this distinction’s aporetic center. Emphasizing the obviousness of the moral boundary between humans and nonhumans (“a distinction as eternal as it is palpable,” he insists), Douglass’s now twice- failed efforts to invoke it highlight the insusceptibility of this boundary to rational argumentation. If only human speech is admissible testimony to one’s humanity, then one must first be acknowledged to be h uman before one can testify to one’s humanity. In “Claims,” however, Douglass does not linger to press this point. Instead he merely gestures to this circular logic by concluding his opening discussion where it began: “I assume . . . that the Negro is a man,” he reiterates, and without further comment, shifts tack.65 Douglass now reframes the question before him: assuming his race is human, he proposes to consider whether the races are genealogically re- lated. Still he delays his ethnological argument here, prefacing the case for monoge ne tic descent that he is about to deliver with reflections on science’s susceptibility to bias and distortion. “Science is favorable to distinction,” he notes, cautioning that it tends, by disciplinary habit, to proliferate types regardless of whether t hose distinctions matter. Indeed, Douglass here pres ents science as a kind of aesthetic— “a demand for classes, grades, and intellectual capacities,” a taste not just a technique for discriminating be- tween t hings. Building upon this insight, he observes that “fashion is not confined to dress” since science, too, has its vogues: “Scientific writers, not Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 43 less than o thers, write to please, as well as to instruct,” and hence they may “unconsciously . . . sacrifice what is true to what is popu lar.”66 Moreover when the case is race, the room for bias— unconscious or other wise—is irremediably broad, for as Douglass observes, “viewed apart from the authority of the Bible, neither the unity, nor diversity of origin of the human family, can be demonstrated.”67 It is, in other words, “impossible to get far enough back” to definitively determine humanity’s origins, leav- ing ethnologists to weigh the evidence on both sides— a task in which “the temptation . . . to read the Negro out of the h uman f amily” does b attle with the desire to uphold “the credit of the Bible” and to honor “the in- stinctive consciousness of the common brotherhood of man.”68 By way of preface to the ethnological argument he is about to launch, then, Douglass gives us a discourse on the myriad ways in which science, too, is subject to unempirical bias. Douglass’s prefatory remarks in “Claims” thus cast doubt both on ra- cial science (with its disciplinary and extradisciplinary biases) and on hu- manistic discourse (with its groundless self- assertions), leaving us to cast about for an authority that could help us to definitively answer “the vital question of the age.” In this way, the essay’s opening provocatively creates what Jared Hickman describes as “a situation in which the rhetoricity of all knowledge- claims is somewhat uncomfortably exposed.”69 Indeed, the vacuum of authority extends even to Douglass, who has by this point pre- empted the force of the ethnological argument he is about to deliver. Had Douglass concluded his essay by resting his case for monogenism, we would have been left with an essay that is perversely self- defeating. Instead, at the end of “Claims” Douglass expressly lets his case for monogenism unravel in order to reframe the question of his humanity once again. In his final paragraphs, Douglass abruptly turns aside from his exposition of h uman unity to acknowledge the possibility that science will ultimately side against him. “What if all this reasoning be unsound?” he speculates; “What if in- genious men are able to find plausible objections to all arguments maintain- ing the oneness of the human race?”70 In a climactic final pivot, Douglass sets aside his defense of monogenism to make one last pitch for “the claims of the Negro” from a slightly dif fer ent materialist perspective. Here Dou- glass invokes a new authority to fill the vacuum his essay has exposed; unlike the essay’s earlier candidates, this authority is immune to “the rhetoricity of all knowledge- claims” because it makes no claims to truth, only power. Working in an entirely new vein, the conclusion of “Claims” frames an alternative theory of h uman rights that does not depend upon establishing 44 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality that all races share a common identity. In other words, as Douglass shows us, the genealogical debates that absorb racial science may not, in fact, be decisive. “I sincerely believe, that the weight of the argument is in f avor of the unity of origin of the h uman race, or species,” he assures us, but What, if we grant that the case, on our part, is not made out? Does it follow, that the Negro should be held in contempt? Does it follow, that to enslave and imbrute him is e ither just or wise? I think not. Human rights stand upon a common basis; and by all the reasons that they are supported, maintained and defended, for one variety of the human family, they are supported, maintained and defended for all the human family; b ecause all mankind have the same wants, arising out of a common nature. A diverse origin does not disprove a common nature, nor does it disprove a united destiny.71 The major claim Douglass makes h ere is that even two races of “diverse origin” may nonetheless, serendipitously, share a “common nature” and therefore be entitled to the same rights. But this discussion also introduces a rather dif fer ent line of argument. Alongside his image of a biologically unrelated “ human f amily” conjoined by a “common nature,” Douglass de- scribes a biracial nation related by mutual interests (“wants”) and bound together by a “united destiny.” In pointing to this “united destiny,” Dou- glass reminds us that genealogical kinship is not the only form of relation there is. Geo graph i cal proximity— the shared nature that is one single American landscape— produces its own kind of relations, as neighbors can- not help but impinge on each other in going about the business of seeing to their “wants” in a shared physical economy. And the t hing about these kinds of relations is that they bind populations together through interde- pendence and mutual vulnerability regardless of whether t hose populations are homogeneous or diverse. In this sense, Douglass’s appeal to an American f uture bound to a bira- cially “united destiny” sets up a new kind of argument on behalf of the claims of his race. As Foucault observes, “the subject of right and the sub- ject of interest are not governed by the same logic,” and in his closing re- marks, Douglass underscores this difference by suggesting that denying his race’s demand for freedom is not only not “just” but also not “wise.”72 Against the conclusions of white segregationists and Black emigrationists, he insists that “the Negro and white man are likely ever to remain the principal inhabitants of this country.” Ironically repurposing proslavery arguments about how the African race is uniquely designed to withstand Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 45 hard labor in harsh climates, he notes that “the history of the Negro race proves them to be wonderfully adapted to all countries, all climates, and all conditions,” thus proving that, barring genocidal “extermination” (“not probable”) or mass exodus (“out of the question . . . [the Negro’s] attach- ment to the place of his birth is stronger than iron”), “all the facts in his history mark out for [the Negro] a destiny, united to Amer i ca and Ameri- cans.”73 What ever racial differences might divide them, Black and white Americans, Douglass suggests, will inevitably remain united by another “common nature” in the national landscape to which their “common des- tiny” is bound. And in this shared physical environment, interdependence is unavoidable even if other forms of relation (familial, ideological, or sympathetic) are not. Having established the inevitability of ongoing proximity, Douglass closes with the clear and ominous warning that acknowledging his race’s right to freedom, life, liberty, and knowledge is therefore not just right but prudent. Whether this population shall . . . b e made a blessing to the country and the world, or whether their multiplied wrongs shall kindle the vengeance of an offended God, w ill depend upon the conduct of no class of men so much as upon the Scholars of this country. . . . T here is but one safe road for nations as for individuals. . . . The flaming sword of offended justice falls as certainly upon the nation as upon the man. God has no children whose rights may be safely trampled upon. The sparrow may not fall to the ground without the notice of His eye, and men are more than sparrows.74 With these portentous words, Douglass suggests that to refuse to accom- modate the interests of Black Americans is to put the interests of white Americans in peril. Couched in the language of divine vengeance, Douglass summons the specter of an imminent Black uprising against the “multiplied wrongs” of slavery and racial oppression, presenting the ethnological “Scholars of this country” with the prospect of their own violent death as a dif fer ent kind of rationale for granting that Black Amer- icans are entitled to freedom. Moreover, in this shift from identity to interests, the significance of the ethnological question with which Doug- lass started (is the Negro h uman and related to the white race?) falls away. For the prob lem of proximity— which necessarily pres ents a choice between peacefully accommodating one’s neighbors’ needs or else denying their interests with vio lence— remains the same regardless of who (or what) the 46 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality players are. Indeed, as Douglass’s citation of Matthew 10:29 above suggests (and as passages discussed in the next section of this chapter w ill underscore), the same truth holds for men as for sparrows: “God has no children whose rights may be safely trampled upon.” Thus without relinquishing his claim to humanity, Douglass concludes “Claims” by bracketing the relevance of that claim’s controversy. Instead, he points to the prob lem of interdependence—of the mutual vulnerability to which we, of all species, are exposed by virtue of our proximity in a terrestrial “common nature,” the resources of which we all rely on to supply our needs and wants. What is so fascinating, then, about this final pivot in Douglass’s response to ethnology is the way that the prospect of our physically “united destiny” takes him beyond the question of “the human”— beyond, that is, both liberal humanist and racialist logics that make moral consideration contingent upon speciological belonging. In the next section, I will explore how Douglass develops this nonhumanistic reasoning across his other writings of the 1850s. As we s hall see, animals, animal instincts, and the physical laws of nature loom large in this work, supplementing his moral critiques of slavery and appeals to h uman sympathy with a new logic of material risk and existential necessity. Abolitionist Animals The rising cachet of scientific racism in American po liti cal discourse in the 1850s made it increasingly urgent for abolitionists like Douglass to disavow any similarity between slaves and animals, and yet his writings of this de- cade are in fact strewn with animals, deliberately courting animal com- parisons in ways his earlier writings do not. In the very historical moment in which he might have had the most at stake in distancing himself from animals he starts to think more regularly through them about the moral claims— and perhaps more impor tant, as I s hall suggest, the amoral claims— that the nonhuman world holds on the h uman. For through the animals he represents— animals that stampede, rear, kick, and bite— Douglass highlights the speciologically universal instinct to violently resist any threat to one’s life and liberty, marking t hese things as basic, more- than- human rights. I w ill thus argue that Douglass’s identifications with animals in the 1850s are part of his systematic effort to frame an abolition- ist argument that is strategically agnostic toward the question of his race’s humanity—an argument that operates outside of the liberal discourse of human equality and moral right by tactically embracing, instead, the specter of h uman animality and the threat of physical vio lence. In other Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 47 words, I suggest that Douglass embraces animals in the 1850s not in spite of but b ecause of scientific racism and the doctrine of Black bestiality it codified. Around the same time Douglass published “Claims,” he was also at work on a revised and expanded version of his autobiography, titled My Bondage and My Freedom, which he published the following year in 1855. The re- written text includes a striking alteration in his account of the pivotal year he spent hired out to Mr. Covey, a man known locally for “breaking” slaves. As Douglass had recounted in The Narrative, on his first day at Covey’s he was whipped for losing control of a team of “unbroken oxen” who twice make a break for freedom, overturning their cart and destroying a gate in their stampede. In his retelling of this scene in the 1855 autobiography, Douglass inserts a curious moment of reflection, set off on its own in an uncharacteristically short paragraph in the text. Now, in the midst of this harrowing experience, the young Douglass stops to take note of his like- ness to the oxen causing him so much trou ble. “I now saw, in my situation, several points of similarity with that of the oxen,” he writes. “They were property, so was I; they were to be broken, so was I. Covey was to break me, I was to break them; break and be broken— such is life.”75 In 1855, Douglass was well aware of the compelling reasons to disavow any “points of similarity” between himself and t hese beasts of burden— reasons that had, if anything, grown more acute in the interim since his first autobiography. The Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass betrays no such inclination to sympathy: where comparisons between slaves and animals appear in this text, it is to critique the glaring injustice of a sys- tem in which “horses and men, c attle and w omen, pigs and c hildren, all [hold] the same rank in the scale of being.”76 Yet despite the intervening ascent of ethnological discourse and the seemingly authoritative support racist science lent to the idea that the African race comprises, as Russwurm encapsulates it, “something between man and brute creation,” My Bondage and My Freedom underscores two basic commonalities: both oxen and slaves are subjected to an overwhelming physical power and, when pressed, both may also assert a violent force of their own. This lesson is even more explicit in the opening scene of Douglass’s 1854 novella, The Heroic Slave. During a quiet moment in the forest, the story’s hero, Madison Washington, observes the bold be hav iors of the wild ani- mals around him and ruefully contemplates his own acquiescence to slav- ery. “ Those birds, perched on yon swinging boughs . . . though liable to the sportsman’s fowling piece, are still my superiors,” he chides himself. “They live free, though they may die slaves.” Noting that even a nearby 48 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality “miserable” snake, “when he saw my uplifted arm . . . turned to give me battle,” Washington confesses, “I dare not do as much as that. I neither run nor fight, but do meanly stand,” answering the lash with “piteous cries.”77 The example of t hese forest animals leads Washington to conclude that he, too, has a natu ral right to self- determination, and the scene ends with his resolution to resist: “Liberty I will have, or die in the attempt to gain it,” he proclaims. Thus echoing Patrick Henry’s iconic revolutionary ultimatum, the rousing conclusion of Washington’s forest soliloquy (which carries on for several more climactically declamatory lines), rings with an eloquence that Ivy Wilson glosses as “an exercise in liberation through literacy”— a per for mance of both Washington’s and, by extension, Doug- lass’s rational intelligence.78 However, the irony of Douglass’s callback to Patrick Henry h ere is that, in this case, Washington’s willingness to mar- tyr himself for his liberty is explic itly modeled on the defiant freedom of birds and snakes. The humanism implicit in Washington’s insistence that liberty is “the inalienable birth- right of e very man” is thus preemptively undercut by the fact that this is a lesson he has learned by observing the inalienable instinct of animals to live f ree or die. Rather than exempli- fying Washington’s uniquely human rationality, then, his principled insistence upon self- determination here appears as a belated obedience to a much more basic and universal instinct for self- defense. The right to freedom does not depend on one’s species designation—in fact, we might say that, on this view, freedom is not a “right” or moral entitle- ment at all so much as it is a reflexive urge that is built into the nature of organic life. Douglass seems to have begun developing this line of thought as early as 1851— before he had weighed in on racial science, but when he was deeply embroiled in rethinking his relation to the U.S. Constitution. In that year, Douglass wrote an editorial on the “Christiana Riot,” an armed skirmish that erupted in a border town of Pennsylvania when a Mary land farmer arrived to reclaim four fugitive slaves and was rebuffed by a local party of primarily f ree Black men who assembled to defend the fugitives. By the end of the fighting the Mary land farmer was dead and the four fugitives, as well as the freeman who had housed them, w ere en route to Canada (aided in a leg of their escape by Douglass himself). What inspired Douglass’s editorial on this first real test of the 1850 Fugitive Slave Law was a rumor that the federal government intended to indict the four fugitive slaves for treason, a proposition Douglass found outrageous. As he argues in his paper, it makes no sense to try a man for treason against the government that enslaves him: Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 49 The only law which the alleged slave has a right to know anything about, is the law of nature. This is his only law. The enactments of this government do not recognize him as a citizen, but as a t hing. In light of the law, a slave can no more commit treason than a h orse or an ox can commit treason. A horse kicks out the brains of his master. Do you try the horse for treason? Then why the slave who does the same thing? You answer, b ecause the slave is a man, and he is therefore responsible for his acts. The answer is sound. The slave is a man and ought not to be treated like a horse, but like a man, and his manhood is his justification for shooting down any creature who s hall attempt to reduce him to the condition of a brute.79 Douglass’s diatribe h ere is deceptively s imple. On a first reading, he seems to call back to humanism’s founding assertion of the “natu ral law” that distinguishes between animals (who are slaves to their nature) and men (whose rationality renders them autonomous from biological compulsion, and hence morally accountable beings). Thus Douglass points out the hy- poc risy of legally denying the slave’s humanity while proposing to hold him morally responsible for his actions. However, Douglass’s reasoning here also moves outside the lines of this very rationale that he invokes. For even as he suggests that the slave who shoots his master is a moral agent, while the horse that brains his master is not, the argument he ultimately advances is that neither horse nor slave could rightfully be hauled into court. As he explains, the slave’s act of vio lence can only be judged by natu ral, not na- tional law, and according to natu ral law the act is innocent, since by na- ture a man has a perfect right to “[shoot] down any creature who shall attempt to reduce him to the condition of a brute.” U nder this descrip- tion, the slave’s re sis tance becomes morally identical, not antithetical, to the re sis tance of the horse, who likewise kicks his master when his master attempts to “reduce him to the condition of a brute.” Thus though Doug- lass attributes the slave’s right to self- defense to his “manhood,” the anal- ogy he draws to the instinct for self- preservation in a h orse testifies to the trans- specific universalism of this natu ral law— “manhood,” in other words, shades here into something more like “self- assertion.”80 Neither men nor horses will tolerate being treated like beasts, and in violently resisting their oppression they exercise an instinctive and naturally ordained right to self- defense. This passage therefore courts a very dif fer ent reading than the one I began with. Instead of simply locating the slave’s right to freedom in his humanness, the passage ultimately suggests that this right is universal— that freedom is synonymous with the instinct for self- preservation com- mon to all autopoetic life. 50 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality Douglass’s rebellious animals thus conjure a rather dif fer ent conception of freedom than the one that has typically circulated in discussions of Dou- glass’s growing militancy in the 1850s. Readers ranging from Martin Lu- ther King and Malcom X to Eric Sund quist and Russ Castronovo have noted how passages like t hese strategically invoke the found ers’ appeals to natu ral law in justifying the vio lence of the American Revolution in order to preemptively justify the armed uprising against slavery that Douglass now anticipates.81 These citational echoes have prompted heated debate about w hether deploying the found ers’ idiom signals Douglass’s coopta- tion by Amer i ca’s patriarchal and white supremacist national legacy, or whether this is instead an example of subversive appropriation, an act of what Castronovo terms “discursive passing.”82 While I’m sensitive to these concerns, I think this debate fails to account for Douglass’s revolutionary animals. Through t hese nonhuman figures, Douglass conjures scenes of violent re sis tance in which the question of that vio lence’s justifiability is superseded by its naturalness, or biological inevitability. For Madison Washington to learn of his natu ral right to liberty from a snake, or for the young Douglass to recognize the necessity of violently resisting Covey from the oxen who resist his own whip, suggests that Douglass might not, after all, have much at stake in w hether Black revolutionary vio lence will be deemed rational rather than animalistic. In place of the higher moral law that documents such as the Declaration assert, Douglass’s rearing snake, stampeding oxen, and kicking h orse refer to a dif fer ent kind of natu ral law— a material force that is prior to moral calculation, an embod- ied imperative for self- preservation in the face of which questions of justice and legal pre ce dent wither away. Put differently, Douglass’s writings in the 1850s endeavor to naturalize natu ral law, locating moral rights not in humankind’s transcendental rea- son or immortal soul, but in the instincts and energetic economy of the material body ( human or nonhuman). Thus, although he invokes the American Revolution as his pre ce dent, in Douglass’s hands natu ral law is not simply a para legalistic justification for violent re sis tance (as Amer i ca’s found ers and Garrisonian abolitionists deployed it), but moreover func- tions as a mechanistic explanation of that vio lence’s material necessity. This conflation of moral law with physical laws makes freedom curiously hard to distinguish from automaticity— hence the tortured ambivalence of the Christiana Riot editorial, which cannot decide whether self- defense is a moral action or an instinctive reflex. This ambivalence is even more ap- parent in another of Douglass’s editorials on the aftermath of the fugitive slave law, provocatively entitled, “Is It Right and Wise to Kill a Kidnap- Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 51 per?” (1854). Here Douglass defends the killing of U.S. Marshal James Batchelder at the Boston court house during the failed attempt to rescue Anthony Burns by arguing that Burns’s right to freedom was upheld by a moral law that is as inexorable as the physical law of gravity. As Douglass asserts, by defying this moral law Batchelder therefore forfeited his right to life in the same way that a man who “flings himself from the top of some lofty monument, against a granite pavement . . . forfeits his right to live [and] dies according to law.” In other words, Douglass reasons, “As human life is not superior to the laws for the preservation of the physical universe, so, too, it is not superior to the eternal law of justice.”83 Here again we can see how Douglass’s conflation of moral and physical law throws the con- cepts of justice and freedom, as we know them, into turmoil. For if the “eternal law of justice” is understood to operate as mechanically as the physical law of gravity—if, that is, the act of shooting Batchelder is no more voluntary than the pavement’s “act” of crushing a suicidal jumper— then undertaking to justify Batchelder’s murder seems as irrelevant, in the first place, as attempting to defend the moral legitimacy of falling down- ward. If justice and gravity act upon us as natu ral necessities, their moral virtue is superfluous. This is, again, an ideologically risky move for Douglass to make at this moment. For although his materialized account of rights allows him to frame his case for racial equality and justified vio lence within the empiri- cal idiom of “the human” that racial science makes authoritative, it also breaks down the moral distinctions (between humanity and animality, and between moral and amoral actions) that might other wise seem to form the crux of that case. But herein, I think, lies the force of his naturalization of natu ral rights, for it suggests that however the “question” of Black human- ity is deci ded, a violent racial uprising against slavery is nevertheless not only pos si ble but in time guaranteed by the mechanisms of physical law. That even the simplest nonhuman organisms resist harm by fight or flight— that nature itself hates oppression in the same lawful way that it abhors a vacuum— means that slavery is materially unsustainable in time, attempting as it does to pervert and repress the liberty- loving physics of the natu ral world.84 Thus Douglass concludes, in an 1857 editorial an- nouncing that “Peaceful Annihilation of Slavery Is Hopeless,” that “the recoil, when it comes, will be in exact proportion to the wrongs inflicted.”85 If the equitable proportionality of this projected racial vio lence (in “exact proportion to the wrongs inflicted”) would seem to be an argument for its justice (echoing Robert Levine’s sense of the self- restraint implicit in what he dubs Douglass’s “temperate revolutionism”), that word “recoil”— drawn 52 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality as it is from the mechanical physics of springs stretched too far and guns that go off— si mul ta neously works to move the vio lence it conjures into the amoral realm of automatic and compulsory action.86 As such, antislavery vio lence comes to look as unstoppable as it is unavoidable. As we saw at the end of “Claims,” in the face of the per sis tent denial of his race’s humanity, Douglass begins to supplement his critique of slavery’s injustice with warnings about its risk: slavery, he argues, is “dangerous as well as wrong.”87 As he suggests, even those listeners who refute his hu- manity and deny that his race is endowed with inalienable rights will none- theless soon find themselves obliged by sheer necessity to accommodate his claims or else brace for a kick to the head. Thus he proposes that “what- ever character or capacity you ascribe to” his race, and however the ques- tions of slavery’s moral, l egal, and theological justifiability are popularly deci ded, slavery is structurally unsustainable. It has, he writes, “no means within itself of perpetuation or permanence,” and must therefore e ither be abolished or implode.88 There is no appeal to humanity or morality in this new argument’s reasoning; instead, in line with the biological dispensa- tion that racial science augurs, Douglass attributes antislavery vio lence to an instinctive demand for self- determination that is inherent in all organic being, and in so doing appeals to the no less compulsory and unreflective instinct for self- preservation among his white audiences. But if this new strain of argumentation sidelines appeals to white sym- pathies, it does not dismiss the po liti cal importance of sentiment. On the contrary, it doubles down on it by suggesting that a knowledge of rights manifests in embodied instincts, affects, appetites, and desires, rather than through the transcendental operation of reason. Thus, for instance, in the same scene of The Heroic Slave in which Madison Washington learns to imitate the instinctive self- assertion of wild animals, George Listwell, a white man eavesdropping on Madison’s soliloquy, is instantaneously con- verted to abolitionism, finding that Washington’s speech “rung through the chambers of his soul, and vibrated through his entire frame.”89 As a number of critics have noted, the sonic imagery h ere emphasizes the em- bodied and even erotic nature of Listwell’s reaction, underscoring the cor- poreality of this moral conviction.90 Conversely, Douglass represents moral oppression as an experience that is as much an affront to the body as it is to reason. In My Bondage and My Freedom, he amends his memorable de- scription of slave songs by noting that he once “heard the same wailing notes, and was much affected by them. . . . during the famine of 1845–6” in Ireland.91 Of course, Douglass’s comparison h ere works on many fronts at once: there is po liti cal strategy in linking slavery to injustices in Eu rope Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 53 so as to align American abolitionism with a transnational revolutionary movement, and there may also be financial interest in it, since Douglass raised significant funds for his newspaper abroad.92 However, this compari- son between the slaves’ “melancholy” songs and the sounds of people lit- erally starving also lends the slave’s “grief and sorrow” all the existential urgency— all the physiological desperation—of the Irishman’s d ying com- plaint. On this view, moral wrongs register as corporealized burdens in the body— forming what Douglass elsewhere describes as “pent up energies of human rights and sympathies.”93 Like any other compiled physical stress, these pent-up energies may be absorbed by the body only up to a point. In this regard, my analy sis of Douglass’s abolitionist animality diverges from recent critical readings of Douglass’s response to the prob lem of human difference in the racial scientific 1850s. In her astute reading of ani- mality and biopolitics in Douglass’s work, Colleen Glenney Boggs also argues that Douglass does not outright denounce but rather recodes the bestialization of Blackness in racial science in ways that show him to have been willing to abandon the discourse of rationality (a move that, as Boggs points out, “flies in the face of roughly thirty years of commentary on Af- rican American writing that has emphasized the acquisition of language and literacy as a key liberatory tool”).94 On Boggs’s reading, Douglass turns away from the language of rationality (as the distinguishing mark of the human) in order to make the body ( human or nonhuman) “the basis for a relational subjectivity” premised upon the shared language of suffering. Thus she argues that Douglass “treats the pained body as the locus of an embodied language that bespeaks the cruelty endemic to slavery’s symbolic order,” challenging audiences to reimagine subjectivity as something that extends to all beings who are subject to suffering, regardless of racial or speciological difference (including the capacity to cognize a “symbolic or- der”).95 Along related lines, Brigitte Fielder demonstrates how frequently abolitionist texts deploy “domesticated animals to mediate their readers’ sympathy for enslaved people,” a substitution that allows them to frame an “alternative model of sympathy that deprioritizes notions of sameness, acknowledging that even humanist sympathy can function across relations of alterity.”96 Like Boggs and Fielder, I find that Douglass’s animals respond to the prob lem that racial (or, as polygenism codifies it, speciological) difference seems to pose to interracial sympathy and recognition. But if, like Boggs, I find that Douglass’s defiant animals draw our attention to the shared vulnerability of all embodied beings, unlike Boggs I am particularly inter- ested in how Douglass invokes that vulnerability not in order to engender 54 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality a sympathetic connection across speciological differences but to convey a timely reminder of the vio lence that suffering unleashes, lighting up the precariousness of proximity and the necessity of mutual accommodation with or without intersubjective sympathy or recognition. W hether or not Madison Washington feels an affinity with “that accursed and crawling snake,” he acknowledges the force of its bodily threat to him and there- fore accedes to its demand to be left alone. In this way, proximity consti- tutes a community around the material interrelations of diverse bodies that is not contingent upon kinship or affects of solidarity. In keeping with Lloyd Pratt’s reading of “strangerhood” in Douglass’s late antebellum writ- ings, then, I suggest that Douglass’s animals identify “an ineluctable bar- rier to mutual intelligibility that also functions as a kind of hinge point for mutuality.”97 In his turn to the animal body, Douglass develops a new strain of antislavery rhe toric in which relations of sympathy and intersub- jective recognition take a backseat to material relations of proximity, embodied necessity, and mutual exposure. But this new argument also creates difficulties for Douglass since, unlike his appeals to sympathy and moral conversion, his invocations of slavery’s systemic risk can seem to leave audiences with very little to do. By the lights of his new, materialist antislavery logic, slavery not only ought to be abolished, but it inevitably will be, with or without white Amer i ca’s consent, lending this argument a fatalistic providentialism un- characteristic of Douglass’s earlier work. Thus, for instance, in his power- ful Fourth of July address, Douglass boldly asserts that “the doom of slavery is certain”— vouchsafed not by a preponderance of antislavery votes or by the sure vengeance of an angry god, but by the much more diffuse and not- quite- human agency of what he describes as “the obvious tendencies of the age” toward globalization and (which turns out to be the same thing) freedom.98 As he tells us, “No nation can now shut itself up from the surrounding world and trot round in the same old path of its fathers without interference,” for “intelligence is penetrating the darkest corners of the globe. It makes its pathway over and under the sea, as well as on the earth. Wind, steam, and lightning are its chartered agents. Oceans no longer divide, but link nations together.”99 Although the nation- dissolving “ intelligence” Douglass alludes to h ere is clearly com- municated by human technologies— “wind, steam, and lightning” met- onymically referencing oceanic navigation, railroads, and telegraphs— his heavi ly allegorized prose distances these circulations and the “intelligence” they spread from human action and intentions. Instead, the globalizing “tendencies of the age” he describes here take on the impersonal dimen- Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 55 sions of a world spirit or hidden hand—an emergent systemic rather than strictly human force whose fugitive and deterritorializing freedom of cir- culation Douglass most directly identifies with “agents” of matter itself. Thus this essay’s famously fiery denunciation of American hy poc risy ends on a paradoxically quietist note. Bracketing the issue of racial differ- ence (“Must I undertake to prove that the slave is a man?,” Douglass sighs; “The time for such argument is passed”) and likewise waiving its earlier call for a recommitment to American Revolutionary ideals, Douglass’s jer- emiad concludes by heralding emancipation’s inescapability: in this essay, abolition is both the means of national repentance and the globally wrought apocalypse that awaits an unregenerate nation.100 And thus instead of reaffirming American self- determination, Douglass’s natu ral law rhe- toric ends by challenging the very notion of individual and national sover- eignty that the found ers had originally used that rhe toric to defend. In Douglass’s empiricized version, the nation’s naturalness indicates its in- ability to “shut itself up from the surrounding world,” highlighting its exposure to and imbrication within a global community of h uman and nonhuman beings interrelated through biological, geophysical, ideologi- cal, and economic systems whose multiplied complexity no individual nor nation could hope to fi nally control. It is, consequently, unclear what role is left in this climatological drama for Douglass’s audiences to play. As Carrie Hyde argues in her brilliant reading of weather in The Heroic Slave, by “depicting nature as the princi ple agent” of antislavery re sis tance, “Doug- lass is able to suggest that opposition to slavery is more fundamental than the actions of any one individual or group.”101 Indeed, he suggests that opposition to slavery may originate in forces that are not h uman at all. In this re spect, Douglass’s Fourth of July prophecy is not only antira- cist and transnationalist but also posthumanist. Resurrecting the discourse of natu ral rights as a self- executing modality of natu ral laws, Douglass turns the found ers’ liberal humanistic logic on its ear by making freedom an involuntary instinct of the body and an inexorable tendency of matter itself. Far from marking a uniquely human autonomy from natu ral laws, this empirical freedom is all but indistinguishable from physical necessity. Moreover, it conjures an empirical public that likewise breaks from the found ers’ nationalistic vision. For whereas Amer i ca’s liberal institutions convoke a public constituted by formally equal and enfranchised indi- viduals conjoined by contract and brought together by rational, delibera- tive debate, Douglass’s revolutionary animals and abolitionist oceans point to a public that comprises all earthly beings whatsoever, conjoined by material interrelations and brought together by the ongoing strug gle to 56 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality satisfy their basic “wants”— including, most basically, the freedom to pursue t hose interests. Access to this embodied public is not restricted by qualifications— one need not be accredited as “rational,” or “ human,” or “morally free” to participate in it. On the contrary, the polemical force of this embodied public is that participation in it— and thus exposure to it—is strictly unavoidable, a condition of being. In his invocations of an empiricized natu ral law, then, Douglass makes an end run around the ef- forts of some racial scholars to definitively exclude his race from the ranks of the human by dismantling the humanistic logic that makes humanity a criteria for po liti cal participation in the first place. As Bruno Latour might describe this, Douglass renounces the arbitrary distinction between “natu- ral” (passive, animalistic) and “po liti cal” ( free, h uman) action, challenging us “to redefine politics as the entire set of tasks that allow the progressive composition of a common world.”102 If racial science should succeed in dis- proving our “common nature,” it cannot deny this common world: with this insight, voiced in “Claims” and developed across Douglass’s images of natu ral vio lence in the 1850s, Douglass twists racial science’s empiricism to his advantage, demonstrating how its embodied and hierarchical ac- count of the h uman might in fact sponsor a more capacious and inclusive postnationalist and nonhumanist vision of worldly community. From our con temporary standpoint, this may seem like a power ful (or at least fash ion able) move. Douglass’s insistence upon the way in which proximate bodies impinge on each other regardless of their po liti cal sta- tus boldly renounces what Mel Chen describes as humanism’s “animacy hierarchy”— the systematic denial of nonhuman agency by which humanism licenses the po liti cal exclusion of, and moral indifference to, racialized, animalized, and objectified bodies.103 However, this liberatory renuncia- tion also comes with steep costs to Douglass’s politics, for, as we have just seen, it erodes the liberal politics he is other wise inclined to champion. Thus if Douglass’s antislavery materialism defuses the force of denials of Black humanity, it does so by giving up on the unique moral and po liti cal value of h uman belonging and mooting the question of racial equality— both of which (unique moral value and racial equality) he was understand- ably keen to claim for Black humanity. While his insurgent bodies clearly resist objectification, their agency cannot serve Douglass as proof of their liberal personhood. Instead, his embodied public is full of unowned agency, agency that (like freedom, on his redescription) is not a property of persons but rather percolates up from materiality itself. Although antislavery, this materialist riposte to racial science leads Douglass a long way off from the liberalism he might like to inhabit. Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 57 To be sure, Douglass never explic itly formulates the challenges his ma- terialism poses to the liberal princi ples he champions. However, his sense of their contradiction may be registered in the reluctance with which he turns to this argument. As it appears in his late antebellum writings, this antislavery materialism functions (like the antislavery vio lence that he usu- ally summons it to justify) as a kind of position of last resort. Indeed, in “Claims” his appeal to our materially “united destiny” explic itly appears as the essay’s last line of defense against polygenist racial theory, and in his Fourth of July address it again emerges only a fter his appeal to Amer- i ca’s liberal princi ples is exhausted. Such reluctance suggests, as I have al- ready speculated, that Douglass was a liberal driven to develop a materialist argument against slavery by the popu lar ascendance of racial science and empiricism’s cultural authority, more broadly. But if, on this view, Doug- lass’s embrace of embodiment is a local strategy and not the po liti cal end- game, the same cannot be said of posthumanist materialisms today, raising the question of whether the illiberalism of materialism’s politics is fully reg- istered in these theories. I will return to this in Chapter 4, where I will suggest that the question of the contradictions between materialism and liberalism is one whose absence has s haped posthumanism’s failure to rig- orously theorize its relation to racial and social justice traditions. By way of conclusion, I would like to look at one final example of Dou- glass’s antislavery materialism that lights up its illiberal and nonhumanis- tic tendencies. I have argued elsewhere for the burgeoning materialism and “amoral abolitionism” of My Bondage and My Freedom; rather than reca- pitulate that argument h ere I would like to return to The Heroic Slave which, as Douglass’s only foray into fiction, allowed him to distill his ideas with vivid concision.104 We have already seen how the novella’s opening scene naturalizes natu ral law by identifying Madison Washington’s natu ral right to freedom with the instinctive self- assertion of animals in the forest. At the end of the novella, in the climactic scene of Washington’s successful mutiny aboard the Creole, Douglass again rewrites the rational vio lence of American Revolutionary liberalism as natu ral, inhuman, and involuntary vio lence— a demand for freedom that is systemic to the material order of being. Like the prior three episodes of the story, which are narrated by Mr. Listwell, this pivotal episode is also narrated by a white character, Tom Grant. Grant survived the mutiny aboard the Creole and now, two months later, relates the story to an audience of dubious fellow sailors at a Richmond coffee house. He is goaded into the retelling by a sailor named Williams who blames the affair on mismanagement: “All that is needed in dealing 58 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality with a set of rebellious darkies, is to show that ye’re not afraid of ’em,” Williams scoffs. “A drop of blood from one on ’em w ill skeer a hundred.”105 Routing the narrative of the mutiny through Grant’s defense of his defeat thus allows Douglass to specify precisely what, in the eyes of this unsympa- thetic white Southerner, overmastered him. And as Grant tells it, the lesson of the mutiny is a curiously blended one. For on the one hand, contrary to Williams, Grant insists that Washington is proof that “ there are exceptions to this general rule” that “[Negroes] are ignorant,” and Grant leaves the Creole affair convinced that “this whole slave- trading business is a disgrace and scandal to Old V irginia.”106 However, when pressed, Grant does not ascribe the mutiny’s success to Washington’s exceptional intelligence and bravery. Instead, he compares the mutiny to a hurricane or maelstrom, a natu ral disaster in the face of which “we lose our indignation and disgust in lamentation of the disaster, and in awe of the Power which controls the ele ments.”107 In Grant’s eyes, then, Washington’s agency dis appears into the imper- sonal forces of nature, and this eclipse is borne out by the account he gives of the role of the weather in the mutiny’s events. Grant was knocked un- conscious early in the fighting and, upon waking, attempts to rally the crew, who have retreated to the ship’s rigging. But Washington interrupts Grant’s efforts with an eloquent defense of the justice of his cause, invoking his namesake’s example: “God is my witness that LIBERTY, not malice, is the motive for this night’s work. . . . We have done that which you applaud your fathers for doing, and if we are murderers, so were they.”108 If The Heroic Slave were a conventionally liberal story, this speech should have been the end of it. But in fact it makes little impression on Grant. For although he “forgot [Washington’s] blackness in the dignity of his manner, and the el- oquence of his speech,” these evidences of Washington’s equal humanity are nevertheless not enough to overcome Grant’s racial prejudice: “It was not that his princi ples were wrong in the abstract; for they are the princi- ples of 1776,” Grant confesses. “But I could not bring myself to recognize their application to one whom I deemed my inferior.”109 Thus rational dis- course and appeals to shared princi ple fail to end Grant’s standoff with Washington; instead, it is finished by force. First, there is the sheer force of Washington’s desire for freedom: Washington tells Grant that if they come near “a slave- cursed shore” he w ill set fire to the ship’s magazine and blow them all “into a thousand fragments,” an oath that convinces Grant “that re sis tance was out of the question.” Next, as if to underscore Wash- ington’s threat of fragmentation by fire, a storm suddenly blows up, howl- ing with sublime fury and threatening to splinter the ship. If Washington’s Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality 59 threat convinced Grant to defer his re sis tance, the ocean’s threat momen- tarily convinces him to forget his objection altogether: “For awhile we had dearer interests to look a fter than slave property.” It is thus not Washing- ton’s idealistic rhe toric but the storm’s existential threat that ultimately engenders cross- racial cooperation here, activating every one’s “dearer in- terests” in survival than in preserving “slave property.” Looking grimly out upon the spectacle of “the dreadful hurricane,” Washington calmly proclaims, “Mr. Mate, you cannot write the bloody laws of slavery on those restless billows. The ocean, if not the land, is free.” With this, his last re- ported line in the novella, Washington identifies his freedom with the exi- gencies of a “restless” nature that has compelled Grant to acquiesce to Washington’s demand for freedom despite his continued denial of Wash- ington’s equal humanity. The Heroic Slave thus frames emancipation as a matter of self- preservation, as Grant finds his imminent death far more persuasive than any of Washington’s rhetorical appeals on behalf of his own human rights. But the point here is not simply that Douglass allows Washington’s ra- tional agency— his heroic re sis tance and the humanness it evinces—to be eclipsed by the ocean’s sublime and irrational power. Rather, the point is that by the naturalistic logic with which the story begins— the logic that identifies the right to freedom in “animal” instincts— Washington’s vio- lence is of the same order as the ocean’s: both are construed as elemental forces impersonally inscribed in the “restless” or freedom- loving order of matter. One mea sure of the radicalism of this conceptual move is that, in modeling Washington’s uprising on the unruly ocean, Douglass in fact em- braces the argument that Daniel Webster had advanced in 1842 in an at- tempt to re- enslave the p eople of the a ctual Creole, who had been officially liberated when the mutineers landed at Nassau. As Carrie Hyde reminds us, on the day of the historical mutiny t here had been no storm; instead, Douglass’s in ven ted storm seems to derive from Daniel Webster’s subse- quent effort to establish that the British lacked jurisdiction when they freed the Creole by arguing that the mutineer’s “unlawful force” ought to be re- garded like the “stresses of weather” (according to maritime law, when foul weather drives a vessel into port, it is exempted from becoming sub- ject to the laws of that country).110 Hyde suggests that Douglass’s squall “strategically reappropriates natu ral meta phors as a figure for natu ral rights,” converting Webster’s conflation of violent mutinies and violent weather into a “universalizing rhe toric of natu ral law as a model for po liti- cal reform in the United States.”111 I concur with Hyde’s analy sis but wish to add that the natu ral law Douglass hereby invokes is conceptually alien 60 Racial Science and the Prob lem of Human Equality to the one to which Madison Washington’s forebears appealed, and that the mechanisms of po liti cal change this naturalized natu ral law envisions likewise exceed the deliberative rationality and national self- constitution the found ers’ liberal institutions enshrined. This is what Douglass means by taking seriously Webster’s de- animating conflation of slave uprisings with bad weather: his naturalization of natu ral rights drains the rational agency out of Washington’s revolutionary action, transforming freedom from a human prerogative into an ontological imperative. As Douglass’s 1850s writings suggest, far from distinguishing the free ( human beings) from the materially determined (nonhuman beings), this natu ral freedom percolates throughout the world, finding expression in snakes and birds no less than in transatlantic commerce and violent weather. And where this irrepressible urge breaks out—in stampedes, uprisings, and cyclones—it confronts those in its way with their own freedom: fight, fly, accommo- date, or die. Douglass’s depictions of freedom’s empirical imperative in the 1850s thus bracket the question of racial difference and human equality that both liberal and racialist discourses had made to seem paramount to the ques- tion of slavery and the prospect of a multiracial national community. And yet by making freedom an instinct of m atter, his antislavery materialism creates prob lems for the notion of rational agency and h uman autonomy that ground liberal humanist doctrine. My next chapter w ill further ex- plore this erosion of agency in antislavery materialism by turning to the late work of Henry David Thoreau. Like Douglass, Thoreau also followed the rise of racial science closely, adopting and adapting its empiricism in ways that indelibly reshaped his antislavery politics in the 1850s.