NEW BOOKS REVIEWED The Life op Henry David Thoreau. By F. B. Sanborn. Bos ton and New York : Houghton Mifflin Company, 1917. The writings of Henry David Thoreau, little regarded during Lis lifetime, have steadily and quietly won their way to high esteem in the minds of an increasingly large number of readers. Today almost every page that Thoreau ever wrote has been printed, and portions of his works have been translated into various European languages. Selections from the books of this somewhat eccentric philosopher, poet, and naturalist, are included in the courses of instruction for high-school and college students in the United States ?not merely as samples of a distinctive product, but as a part of our best literary heritage. On the whole, the fame of Thoreau ha? constantly grown during the last half-century and now, more than ever before, he is understood to be one of those few persons whose complete life-records have meaning and value for posterity. The permanent charm of a quaintly individual high-mindedness, of an original yet conscientiously truth-seeking spirit, is felt in Thoreau's life-story with the actuality that only full biographical treatment can give. As compared with earlier memoirs?with Salt's Life of Thoreau, with Channing's Thoreau, the Poet Naturalist, and even with Mr. Sanborn's first biography of Thoreau, published in 1882?this new Life by the late Frank B. Sanborn justifies itself as a needed and definitive work. So thorough has been the search for records and manuscripts that it is unlikely that there will ever be further dis coveries of importance. All the existing materials were in the hands of Mr. Sanborn, the last survivor of the Concord group, who, as the result of his long researches in the writings of Thoreau?and of Ellery Channing as well?and by reason of his ten years' inti macy with Thoreau and his family, was thoroughly qualified to write the final Life. The new biography, besides including a number of verses, letters, and memoranda not hitherto accessible, presents many additional facts about Thoreau's ancestry, and contains, as per haps its most interesting single feature, a collection of his college essays given in their complete form. NEW BOOKS REVIEWED 309 Emerson once spoke of Thoreau as * ' a person not accounted for by anything in his antecedents, his birth, his education, or his way of life." It was this remark that set Mr. Sanborn upon a long investigation, which has disclosed quite fully the descent of Thoreau and has brought to light many interesting memoirs of his ancestors. The Thoreaus when first heard of (about 1725) were merchants in St. Helier, the capital of the Channel Island, Jersey. They were respectable, middle-class people, well educated and rising in the social scale. In 1773 John Thoreau of Jersey, a seaman, came to Boston. During the Revolution he prospered in privateering and commerce, and in 1781 he married Jane Burns, the daughter of a Scotch emigrant from Sterling. The mother of Jane Burns was Sarah Orrok, whose parents were David Orrok, a Quaker, and Hannah Tillet, who was possibly of Huguenot descent. John Tho reau the Jerseyman and Jane Burns had eight sons and daughters, only two of whom married?John, the father of Henry, and Eliza beth, who married a Mr. Billings and removed to Maine. The ancestry of Henry Thoreau on his father's side was thua well mixed?a condition doubtless favorable to genius?and it is interesting to note that in the opinion of so cautious and well informed a biographer as Mr. Sanborn " certain traits in which Henry seemed peculiar might be traced back to the Channel Island, inhabited by a composite, pugnacious, sturdy, thrifty, equalized but privileged people of the old Duchy of Normandy." From the maternal side also strong qualities were transmitted. Henry's mother was Cynthia Dunbar, the daughter of the Reverend Asa Dunbar and Mary Jones, whose father was Colonel Elisha Jones of Weston, near Concord. The Colonel, we are told, " owned two slaves and much land in Massachusetts and Maine; had for ten years represented Weston in the Provincial Assembly, and in January, 1774, had prevented his town from adopting the plan for Committees of Correspondence and a Continental Congress." A man of firm character, he was steadfast in his adherence to the mother country. He escaped banishment only by death, and his estate at Weston was confiscated. Eight of his sons suffered banish ment and the confiscation of their considerable property. Pleas antly and with accurate detail the biographer has related the adven turous tale of how two of these brothers, Josiah and Simeon, came to be confined in the Concord prison, and how they escaped. Not less interesting is the account given of Thoreau's maternal grandfather. A graduate in 1767 of Harvard College, the Reverend Asa Dunbar was pastor of a Congregational Church in Salem at the time of his marriage. As an undergraduate, he had headed a rebel lion which for a time had threatened to disrupt the institution. Early in the autumn of 1766 increased severity on the part of the faculty regarding the offense of absence from morning prayers became a grievance with the students. Moreover, a well-founded 310 THE NORTH AMERICAN REVIEW demand was made upon the college steward for better food. Dun bar, who voiced this demand, was refused and threatened with ex pulsion. Later he wrote the manifesto put forth by the whole student body, and was one of the four seniors to sign it. In the end Dr. Holyoke yielded to a modus vivendi. Dunbar's action gave him a standing among the alumni, and doubtless favored his early ordination and his marriage with the daughter of Colonel Jones in 1772. In some manuscripts of the Weeks family of Green land, New Hampshire, which he was permitted to copy before they were sold to Harvard University, Mr. Sanborn found a detailed story of this affair, supplementing previous accounts. Further items of especial interest in relation to the Dunbars are a signed state ment of Asa Dunbar's testifying to the embarrassment which he suffered in consequence of his intermarriage with a loyal family, and a full account of the narrow escape of Mrs. Dunbar and her daughters from shipwreck in Frenchman's Bay. Nothing, perhaps, in the whole rather uneventful and necessarily somewhat discursive Life brings the real Henry Thoreau closer to the reader than the college essays, covering many pages, and which Mr. Sanborn wisely reproduced in substantial completeness and in a sequence that facilitates comparison. It is pleasant to find in these earliest writings of Thoreau something of the common traits of youthf ulness, the artless appeal of immaturity ; and at the same time it is instructive to trace through its initial stages the growth of Thoreau's peculiar qualities of mind and heart. The essays, despite a certain amusing participation (discernible by a connoisseur of student themes) in the traits of all undergraduate work, are really remarkable performances for a young college man and are in themselves by no means dull reading. They were written upon such themes (suggestive of independent thought yet giving room for commonplace) as " The Varying Pursuits of Men "; " The Comparative Moral Policy of Severe and Mild Punishments " ; ' ' The Literary Life." The very earliest, an essay on " Following the Fashion," manifests the writer's ruling trait?a readiness to be thought eccentric. Felicity in the choice of terms is to be remarked in the earlier as well as the later compositions. Especially at first there is something of that excessive fondness for figurative language which is natural to young writers eager to explore the resources of style. But the essay on "Anxieties and Delights of a Discoverer," a sophomore theme, based upon the early chapters of Irving's Life of Columbus and the first volume of Bancroft's History of the United States, sometimes equals these sources in conciseness and effective ness of phrasing. Altogether the essays show consistent progress, and illustrate in many ways the characteristic qualities of the mature Thoreau?emphasizing on the whole his power of analysis rather than his inherited love of paradox, though there are proofs enough of originality, and evidences now and then of a u vein of NEW BOOKS REVIEWED 311 humor and juvenility in Thoreau that until his last illness he never quite outgrew." It is a little to be regretted, perhaps, that the Life as a whole is not more consecutively interesting; yet the materials contained in it, if presented rather dryly and with many digressions, are handled with skill and uniform good taste. Though one craves occasionally a little more illumination?a little more sense of reality as distinct from fact??the knowledge that the work as a whole is substantially complete, and that every statement and allusion has been under standingly weighed by a friend and contemporary of Thoreau com pensates for any slight literary defects . The narrative chapters of the work deal fully with the boyhood and youth of Thoreau, with the school-teaching and pencil-making experiences of Henry and his brother John, with " The Week on the River," with the journeyings of Thoreau (including the Minne sota notebook), with his relation to slavery and John Brown. Other chapters, of a more general nature, contain interesting discussions of Thoreau in literature, of his symbolism and paradox, of Thoreau as a friend and neighbor, as a man of letters and of affairs. Par ticularly rewarding is a chapter of " Village Sketches," mostly from the journals. Throughout the book are passages of Thoreau's verse and prose, hitherto unprinted or unfamiliar, which sound the characteristic note quite as effectively as do some of his better known writings, and in some cases reveal more familiarly than those the mental processes of the writer.