BIBLIOGRAPHY preface THE RIM The epigram is taken from Walt Whitman’s poem Starting From Paumanok (Leaves of Grass. New York:The New American Library, 1960). Although a lesser-known work, The Journey Home by Edward Abbey (New York: Dutton, 1978) is a fine collection of essays on the American West. Abbey is perhaps best known for The Monkey Wrench Gang (New York: Lippincott, 1975). i MANCOS SHALE My descriptions of the geographic formations throughout this book are primarily derived from Donald L. Baars, The Colorado Plateau: A Geologic History (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1983) and William Lee Stokes, Geology of Utah (Salt Lake City: Utah Museum of Natural History, 1986). For a more accessible introduction to Utah geology see the Roadside Geology of Utah by Halka Chronic (Missoula: Mountain Press, 1990). Captain John Macomb’s pessimistic words used as the epigram are taken from Wallace Stegner’s classic work, Beyond the Hundredth Meridian (New York: Penguin Books, 1992). My research about the Old Spanish Trail, slave trading, and other interesting tidbits about the San Rafael came from Joseph M. Bauman, Jr.’s Stone House Lands: The San Rafael Reef (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1987) with supplemental input from The Redrock Chronicles by T. H. Watkins (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2000), especially chapters one and ten. Edward Abbey’s finest work, Desert Solitaire: A Season in the Wilderness (New York: Ballantine Books, 1968), remains a classic of American nature writing.The quote from Henry David Thoreau is taken from the last essay he wrote, “Walking” (The Portable Thoreau, edited by Carl Bode [New York: The Viking Press, 1964]). For the most accessible overview on the ecological effects of roads see “The Ecological Effects of Roads” by Reed Noss (Roadrippers Handbook, May 1995: 14–26). The Roadrippers Handbook and a vast array of other information about the effects of roads are available from Wildlands Center for Preventing Roads, POB 7516 Missoula, MT 59807; (406) 543-9551; www.wildlandscpr.org. The journal Conservation Biology devoted an entire issue (February 2000, volume 14, number 1) to the ecological effects of roads. Sources used in this chapter came from the articles, “Factors Influencing the Effectiveness of Wildlife Underpasses in Banff National Park” by Anthony P. Clevenger and Nigel Waltho, and “Review of Ecological Effects of Roads on Terrestrial and Aquatic Communities” by Stephen C. Trombulak and Christopher A. Frissell. The snippet from Simon Ortiz’s poem came from his collection, Woven Stone (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1992). 206 Bibliography 207 ii MORRISON John Dewey produced an unbelievable body of work ranging from philosophy to education. The quotes in this chapter came from Dewey’s Experience and Education (New York: The Macmillian Company, 1939). For an excellent guide to the region’s flowers see Canyon Country Wildflowers by Damian Fagan (Helena: Falcon Press, 1998). The Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance (SUWA, 1471 South 1100 East, Salt Lake City, UT 84105, www.suwa.org) keeps tabs on development and threats to unprotected wilderness through their quarterly newsletter, Redrock Wilderness. Information tidbits on the San Rafael Swell came from Michael R. Kelsey’s Hiking and Exploring Utah’s San Rafael Swell (Provo: Kelsey Publishing, 1990). iii SUMMERVILLE The opening quotation came from an article by Edward Abbey that ignited a still- burning controversy over public lands gazing, “Even the Bad Guys Wear White Hats: Cowboys, Ranchers, and Ruin of the West” (Harper’s. January 1986). Western historians have devoted considerable attention to the Homestead Act. My research on this section came from Bernard DeVoto (Introduction to Beyond the Hundredth Meridian) as well as Stegner’s Beyond the Hundredth Meridian. Patricia Nelson Limerick (The Legacy of Conquest: The Unbroken Past of the American West [New York: W. W. Norton, 1987]) presents a revisionist perspective of western history. Beyond the Hundredth Meridian and The Legacy of Conquest are essential reading for anyone seeking an understanding of western history and the forces that continue to shape public policy in the region. The most exhaustive treatment of grazing can be found in Waste of the West: Public Lands Ranching by Lynn Jacobs (Tucson: Lynn Jacobs, 1991). iv ENTRADA The opening quotation came from an essay by Ralph Metzner (“The Psychopathology of the Human-Nature Relationship”) found in the intriguing collection, Ecopsychology edited by Theodore Roszak, Mary E. Gomes, and Allen D. Kanner (San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1995). While researching his final project, one of my students stumbled upon this revealing quotation from the Forest Service in Contested Landscape: The Politics of Wilderness in Utah and the West, edited by Doug Goodman and Daniel McCool (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1999). v CARMEL Orion magazine recently devoted an issue to the role of the naturalist. I found sev- eral articles engaging. The opening quotation came in an article by Barry Lopez (“The Naturalist.” Orion. Autumn 2001). Filled with short essays and essential facts on each species, The Birder’s Handbook: A Field Guide to the Natural History of North American Birds by Paul R. Ehrlich, David S. Dobkin, and Darryl Wheye (New York: Simon and Schuster Inc., 1988) is a valuable companion for any bird watcher. For the serious student, I rec- 208 Lan d s c a p e o f D e s i r e ommend Frank B. Gill’s Ornithology (New York: W. H. Freeman and Company, 1990), from which I gleaned much of the information in this chapter. For a thor- ough and accessible treatment of speciation and the biodiversity crisis see The Diversity of Life by E. O. Wilson (New York: W. W. Norton, 1992). While Darwin has taken a beating in recent years, a close reading ofThe Origin of Species (London: P. F. Collier, 1909) indicates that Darwin indeed struggled with the Linnaean construct of species as objects fixed in time. Much of the information on shrubs and trees of the Colorado Plateau can be found in Shrubs and Trees of the Southwest Uplands by Francis H. Elmore (Tucson: Southwest Parks and Monuments Association, 1976). Geologic research came from Baars, Chronic, and Stokes. Recent theories concerning the formation of the Colorado Plateau can be found in Natural History of the Colorado Plateau and Great Basin. Kimball T. Harper, et al. (Niwot: University Press of Colorado, 1994). vi WINGATE The quotation from Mitchell Thomashow came from “A Biospheric Natural History” (Orion. Autumn 2001). For information on the current status of bighorn sheep in Utah (both chapter six and twenty) I am indebted to Ron Hodson of the Utah Department of Natural Resources (personal communication). Information about Pleistocene conditions came from The Ice-Age History of Southwestern National Parks by Scott A. Elias (Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1997). Data on wild horses came from the Bureau of Land Management (Office of Public Affairs, Washington D.C. and Utah State Office, Salt Lake City), Wild Horse and Burro Freedom Alliance, and Drury Carr and Doug Hawes-Davis (personal communication) who shared the research for their film El Caballo (High Plains Films: Missoula, MT. www.highplains.org). vii CHINLE My primary source on the uranium boom was Uranium Frenzy by Raye Ringholz (Logan: Utah State University Press, 2003). Charles Wilkinson’s Crossing the Next Meridian (Washington D.C.: Island Press, 1992) provided additional infor- mation regarding the 1982 Mining Law. For a chilling portrait of the effects of nuclear testing, see American Ground Zero: The Secret Nuclear War by Carole Gallagher (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1993). Terry Tempest Williams presents a personal account of nuclear testing in Refuge: An Unnatural History of Family and Place (New York: Pantheon Books, 1991). viii MOENKOPI Gary Snyder has written numerous books that explore the human relationship to the wild. Of particular note are his collection of poems in No Nature (New York: Pantheon Books, 1992) and his collection of essays in The Practice of the Wild (New York: North Point Press, 1990). I found this particular epigram in Ecopsychology. Along with Snyder, Jack Turner (The Abstract Wild [Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1996]) and William Cronon (“The Trouble with Wilderness, or Getting Back Bibliography 209 to the Wrong Nature” in The Great New Wilderness Debate, J. Baird Callicott and Michael P. Nelson, editors. [Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1998]) have con- tributed much to our (post)modern conception of wilderness. Aldo Leopold’s Sand County Almanac (New York: Ballantine Books, 1966) remains an essential classic for anyone concerned with wilderness. All of the Leopold quotes scattered throughout this book came from Sand County Almanac. Research specific to Utah wilderness came from the encyclopedic Wilderness at the Edge, compiled by the Utah Wilderness Coalition. For a succinct overview of Utah’s wilderness debate see Wallace Stegner’s Introduction to Wilderness at the Edge (Salt Lake City: Utah Wilderness Coalition, 1990). Both the Redrock Chronicles by T. H. Watkins and Red: Passion and Patience in the Desert by Terry Tempest Williams (New York: Pantheon Books, 2001) provide useful back- ground to the Utah wilderness debate. Information specific to the San Rafael, including the quote for the Emery County Development Council came from Stone House Lands by Joseph M. Bauman, Jr. ix WHITE RIM The intriguing quotation from Freeman House were the opening lines from his speech “Forgetting and Remembering the Instruction of the Land: The Survival of Places, Peoples, and the More-than-human” (Rufus Putnum Lecture, Ohio University, Athens, OH, April 24, 1996). Specific data on school trust lands came from Cyrus McKell and Dave Harward, “State Trust Lands: Problem in Wilderness Designation,” in Contested Landscape: The Politics of Wilderness in Utah and the West. x MOENKOPI The opening quotation came from Robert Michael Pyle’s “The Rise and Fall of Natural History” (Orion. Autumn 2001). Research on Utah plant life can be found in A Utah Flora, Stanley L. Welsh et al., Great Basin Naturalist Memoirs, num- ber 9 (Provo: Brigham Young University, 1987). Information on R.S. 2477 and other wilderness issues came from Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance (SUWA), specifically Redrock Wilderness 18, number 3 (Autumn 2001), Redrock Wilderness 17, number 1 (Spring 2000), Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance Newsletter 9, num- ber 1 (Spring 1997), Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance Newsletter 8, number 4 (Winter 1991–1992). xi CARMEL I came across this passage from Cormac McCarthy in his novel The Crossing (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1994). The information on John Wesley Powell and pas- sages from Clarence Dutton came from Stegner’s Beyond the Hundredth Meridian. Information on IPP and proposed development in the San Rafael came from Bauman’s Stone House Lands and Ray Wheeler (“The San Rafael Swell Wilderness” in Wilderness at the Edge). The quotations from Everett Ruess came from W. L. Rusho’s Everett Ruess: A Vagabond for Beauty (Salt Lake City: Peregrine Smith Books, 1983). 210 Lan d s c a p e o f D e s i r e xii ASPHALT The quotation from Neil Evernden came from his book The Natural Alien. (Toronto: The University of Toronto Press, 1985). Research on exotic species is a burgeoning field, with research conducted by universities and government agencies that provide information through various web sites. Information on tamarisk came from the following sources: “Ecology of Saltcedar—A Plea for Research” by Benjamin L. Everitt (Environmental Geology 3, 1980: 77–80), “Trees of Salt” by Josie Glausiusz (Discover, March 1996), and “Tackling Tamarisk” by Paul Larmer (High Country News 30, number 10, May 25, 1998). xiii UNCONFORMITY This poignant quotation from Brigham Young is found in Journal of Discourses 6:94. I came across it in an essay by Hugh W. Nibley, “Stewardship of the Air” (New Genesis: A Mormon Reader on Land and Community, edited by Terry Tempest Williams,William B. Smart, and Gibbs M. Smith [Salt Lake City: Gibbs-Smith, 1998]). Nibley also provided the Spencer Kimball quotation originally from Kimball’s “The False Gods We Worship” (Ensign, 6 June 1976). Gleanings from the following constituted my research on Mormon history: New Genesis, Limerick’s Legacy of Conquest, Gallagher’s American Ground Zero: The Secret Nuclear War, Singing Stone: A Natural History of the Escalante Canyons by Thomas Lowe Fleischner (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1999), and A River No More by Phillip L. Fradkin (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1981). For an insightful examination of Mormon irrigation practices see Donald Worster’s Rivers of Empire: Water, Aridity, and the Growth of the American West (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985). For an unprejudiced account of Mormon history see Wallace Stegner’s Mormon Country (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1970). The Lyman Hafen quote comes from his essay “Sacred Ground” in New Genesis. I am indebted to the staff of Capitol Reef National Park for providing valuable information over many years, including allowing me access to the park library. Research concerning the history of Fruita, Capitol Reef National Park, and the immediate vicinity came from Bradford J. Frye, From Barrier to Crossroads: An Administrative History of Capitol Reef National Park, Utah (Denver: U.S. Department of the Interior, 1998). The Roadside History of Utah by Cynthia Larsen Bennett (Missoula: Mountain Press, 1999) was also helpful. Park biolo- gist, Dave Worthington shared his knowledge regarding bighorn sheep, and resource management specialist, Norm Herderson provided information on rain- bow trout and aquatic resources. Information on chukars came from the Utah Department of Natural Resources. xiv CARMEL The opening quotation came from Red: Passion and Patience in the Desert by Terry Tempest Williams. The Powell quotation came from his The Exploration of the Colorado River and its Canyons (New York: Dover, 1961). As we continue to spray the same class of pesticides as DDT, Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring (New York: Fawcett Crest, 1962) remains as important today as it was forty years ago. Bibliography 211 xv NAVAJO REVISITED The opening quotation came from an essay by William Kittredge, “Inside the Earth,” in Reclaiming the Native Home of Hope, Robert B.Keiter, editor (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1998). While a large body of work can be found on the Anasazi, information on the Fremont is relatively limited. My primary sources were Exploring the Fremont by David B. Madsen (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1989) and Dwellers of the Rainbow: The Story of the Fremont Culture in the Capitol Reef Country by Rose Houk (Torrey: Capitol Reef Natural History Association, 1988). xvi MORE NAVAJO Matt Warner, rather than the Sundance Kid, was Butch Cassidy’s sidekick for most of Butch’s outlaw career. Warner eventually went straight and became the sheriff of Price, Utah. While many books on Butch Cassidy have appeared in recent years, Charles Kelly’s book The Outlaw Trail: The Story of Butch Cassidy and the“Wild Bunch” (New York: Bonanza Books, 1959) remains indispensable. Kelly interviewed many of the Wild Bunch while they were still alive, including Warner who provided valuable recollections. For information specific to Robbers Roost, I used Pearl Baker’s The Wild Bunch at Robbers Roost (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1971). Despite numerous claims to the contrary, I found the research presented by Anne Meadows (Digging Up Butch and Sundance [Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1996]) provided conclusive evidence that Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid indeed died in Bolivia. Information on rock varnish came from a paper by R. I. Dorn and T.M. Oberlander (“Rock Varnish.” Progress in Physical Geography 6). My principal sources on rock art were Polly Schaafsma, Indian Rock Art of the Southwest (Santa Fe: School of American Research, 1980) and Sally Cole, Legacy on Stone: Rock Art of the Colorado Plateau and Four Corners Region (Boulder: Johnson Books, 1990). xvii NAVAJO Information on corvids came from Tony Angell’s Ravens, Crows, Magpies and Jays (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1978). Research on scrub jays came from an article in the journal Nature by N. J. Emery and N. S. Clayton (“Effects of Experience and Social Context on Prospective Caching Strategies by Scrub Jays,” Nature 414:22, November 2001). The most comprehensive research on biological soil crust can be found in a government document, Belnap, Jayne, et. al. Biological Soil Crusts: Ecology and Management, Technical Reference 1730-2, (Denver: U.S. Department of the Interior, 2001). Gary Snyder offers thought- provoking essays in A Place in Space (Washington D.C.: Counterpoint, 1995). xviii KAYENTA The opening quotation came from Ken Carey’s Return to the Bird Tribes (San Francisco: Harper San Francisco, 1988). The reference to “sympathy with intelligence” came from Thoreau and was used by Aldo Leopold. 212 Lan d s c a p e o f D e s i r e Information on pothole ecology and insects came from Donald Stokes’s A Guide to Observing Insect Lives (New York: Little Brown, 1983) and A Naturalist’s Guide to Canyon Country by David Williams (Helena: Falcon, 2000), which also provides a good introduction to the region’s natural history. Stegner’s reference to the Dirty Devil came from the essay “A Wilderness Letter,” The Sound of Mountain Water (New York: Dutton, 1980). xix WINGATE Information on Glen Canyon gold exploration came from The Story That Stands Like a Dam by Russell Martin (Salt Lake: University of Utah Press, 1989). Research on Pleistocene megafauna and extinctions came from Elias, The Ice-Age History of Southwestern National Parks, Paul S. Martin and H. E.Wright Jr., edi- tors, Pleistocene Extinctions: The Search for a Cause (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1967); William K. Stevens, “New Suspect in Ancient Extinctions of the Pleistocene Megafauna: Disease,” New York Times (Apr 29, 1997); and Hillary Maybell, “Climate Change Caused Extinction of Big Ice Age Mammals, Scientist Says,” National Geographic News (Nov 12, 2001). For an exhaustive account of packrat middens, see Packrat Middens: The Last 40,000 Years of Biotic Change, edited by Julio C. Betancourt, Thomas R. VanDevender, and Paul S. Martin (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1990). Contemporary natural his- tory data was found in Harper, et al. Natural History of the Colorado Plateau and Great Basin. xx WHITE RIM I encountered the Freud quotation in an essay by Paul Shepard (“Nature and Madness” in Ecospychology). For further reading on education theory, I recom- mend Pedagogy of the Oppressed by Paulo Freire (New York: Continuing Publishing, 1984) and David W. Orr’s Earth in Mind (Washington D.C.: Island Press, 1994). Unfortunately one of the most thought-provoking books on educa- tion, Teaching as a Subversive Activity by Neil Postman and Charles Weingartner (New York: Delacorte Press, 1969), is currently out of print. While not about education per se, I regard Marshall McLuhan’s work, including Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man (New York: McGraw Hill, 1964), as highly rele- vant for anyone in the education field. For a fascinating account of raven behavior see Bernd Heinrich’s two books Mind of the Raven (New York: HarperCollins, 1999) and Ravens in Winter (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1989). xxi ORGAN ROCK SHALE Much of my research specific to Glen Canyon Dam came from Martin (The Story That Stands Like a Dam). Two other books I found helpful were Water in the West, edited by Char Miller (Corvallis: Oregon State University Press, 2000) and it’s predecessor Western Water Made Simple (Washington D.C.: Island Press, 1987). Both of these books are collections of articles that originally appeared in High Country News (POB 1090, Paonia, CO 81428; www.hcn.org), a valuable source of current issues in the West. Specifically, sources in Water in the West included Bibliography 213 articles by Florence Williams (“Government Tames Its Wild, Destructive Dam”),T. J.Wolf ( “How Lake Powell Almost Broke Free of Glen Canyon”), and George Sibley (“Glen Canyon: Using a Dam to Heal a River” and “A Tale of Two Rivers: The Desert Empire and the Mountain). From Western Water Made Simple came information from Ed Marston’s piece, “Reworking the Colorado River Basin.” I encountered several articles concerning the restoration of Glen Canyon, including “Reclaiming a Lost Canyon” by Greg Hanscom, High Country News (November 10, 1997).While the eclectic Canyon Country Zephyr out of Moab, Utah, is noted for it’s entertaining advertisements, it also tackles issues most publications would never touch. Thus far the Zephyr has devoted two issues to the restoration of Glen Canyon. My information comes from the following articles in the April–May 1998 issue (volume 10, number l ) “A Declaration of Independence for the Colorado River” by Richard J. Ingebretsen and “Environmental Integrity on the Colorado Plateau” by Dave Wegner. From the April–May issue 1997 (vol- ume 9, number 1) came information from Ken Sleight, “Flooding Heaven,”and Jim Stiles,“Why We Should Drain Lake Powell.” For more information on the restoration of Glen Canyon contact the Glen Canyon Institute (POB 1925, Flagstaff, UT 86002; www.glencanyon.org). For general reading on the Colorado River see Stegner’s Beyond the Hundredth Meridian, Charles Wilkinson’s Fire on the Plateau (Washington D.C.: Island Press, 1999), and A River No More by Phillip L. Fradkin. The two books that are indispensable to understanding western water issues are Cadillac Desert: The Ameican West and its Disappearing Water by Marc Resiner (New York: Penguin Books, 1993) and Donald Worster’s Rivers of Empire: Water, Aridity, and the Growth of the American West. xxii INUNDATION The opening quotation came from a most unusual book by Jim Corbett, Goatwalking (New York: Viking, 1991).