CHAPTER 3 Biophilia in Thoreau’s Walden Thoreau’s profound affinity with the natural world is central to his writing and h as generated prolific comment. His simultaneously imaginative and inves- tigative relationship to nature has been explored using a wide variety of interpre- tive paradigms, most recently that of ecocriticism, but it has yet to be seriously examined through the lens of evolutionary biology.1 In particular, the concept of biophilia introduced by Edward O. Wilson promises to shed light on the intensely appreciative attentiveness Thoreau lavishes on the “living earth.”2 Studying the human propensity “to focus on life” and to affiliate with a wide variety of living organisms, Wilson and other scholars have amassed a considerable body of evi- dence suggesting that this tendency is innate, an evolved adaptation in Homo sapiens.3 Walden, the book in which Thoreau describes his “life in the woods” and identifies nature as the irreplaceable source of human vitality, contentment, and purpose, speaks eloquently to the “biophilia hypothesis” now under study in fields ranging from biology and anthropology to psychology, cognition, and the arts. Recognizing Thoreau’s multifaceted engagement with nature as the expression of a human universal enables readers to probe the adaptive significance of his radical reassessment of human purpose. His defiance of social norms, together with his affirmation of global kinship, reflects a coherent set of fitness-based choices. Conditions prevailing in the ancestral environment served as the context in which biophilia could evolve. As foraging nomads, the earliest humans were fully integrated in the natural world: intimate familiarity with their physical 1 Lawrence Buell offers a detailed though “not exhaustive inventory of Thoreau’s range of motives and analytical equipment in approaching nature.” He notes the emergence of ecocritical and ecofeminist interest in Thoreau’s work, making only brief mention of E.O. Wilson, biophilia, and “the evolutionary hypothesis.” The Environmental Imagination: Thoreau, Nature Writing , and the Formation of American Culture (Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press, 1995), 9, 134, 188, 215-18, 368. 2 Henry David Thoreau, The Writings of Henry D. Thoreau: Walden, ed. J. Lyndon Shanley (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1971), 309. All citations refer to this edition. 3 Edward O. Wilson, Biophilia (Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press, 1984), 1, 85. 38 American Classics environment (e.g., including flora, fauna, topography, and weather p atterns) would have been essential to survival. Many cognitive paths, affective preferences, and psychological responses were shaped in the crucible of environmental necessity, and modern humans continue to inherit these adaptations, although opportunities for expressing them have undergone radical modification. Thoreau lived well before principles of genetic inher- itance and behavioral evolution were formulated or understood, but he clearly begins with the assumption that “man’s relation to nature has a perma- nent character”; he speaks “to our common ... condition as human beings, a condition he viewed as universal.”4 His thinking, as naturalist, s mall-scale homesteader, proto-ecologist, and environmentalist, proves consistently congruent with the biophilic theory currently fueling research in many dis- ciplines (e.g., biology, anthropology, philosophy, aesthetics), namely, that “the widest valuational affiliation” with nature “has conferred distinctive advantages in the human evolutionary struggle to adapt, persist, and thrive as individuals and as a species.”5 Habitat Selection “The crucial first step to survival in all organisms is habitat selection,” as Wilson and others explain.6 It is no accident that Thoreau describes at such length in Walden “where [he] lived” and what attracted him to his chosen site. He is interested in other people’s choices as well: his curiosity concerning cultures worldwide, ancient and modern, reflects his “paramount interest in man’s rela- tion to nature,” his eagerness to study humans “in one kind of natural setting after another.”7 Just as nonhuman animals follow “inborn rules of behavior” to get themselves into the precise environment “for which ... their anatomy 4 William Drake, “Walden,” in Thoreau: A Collection of Critical Essays, ed. Sherman Paul (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1962), 73; François Specq and Laura Dassow Walls, “Introduction: The Manifold Modernity of Henry D. Thoreau,” in Thoreauvian Modernities: Transatlantic Conversations on an American Icon, ed. François Specq, Laura Dassow Walls and Michel Granger (Athens and London: University of Georgia Press, 2013), 2. 5 Stephen R. Kellert, “The Biological Basis for Human Values of Nature,” in The Biophilia Hypothesis, ed. Stephen R. Kellert and Edward O. Wilson (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1993), 42. 6 Wilson, Biophilia, 106; Michael E. Soulé, “Biophilia: Unanswered Questions,” in The Biophilia Hypothesis, ed. Stephen R. Kellert and Edward O. Wilson (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1993), 443-44. 7 John Aldrich Christie, Thoreau as World Traveler (New York and London: Columbia University Press, 1965), 211. Biophilia in Thoreau’s Walden ChApTer 3 39 and physiology is particularly well suited,” there is evidence that humans, too, are guided by “a set of ingrained preferences,” that in choosing living sites they are “responding to a deep genetic memory of mankind’s optimal environ- ment.” Archaeological evidence indicates that “for most of two million years” the savannas of Africa served as the original human environment.8 Its essen- tial features are open space, abundant vegetation, well-distributed trees, water, and lookout points on near-by hills or ridges. To ancestral humans, such a site promised good hunting and foraging, together with water, fuel, and shelter; it included prospect points for descrying more distant game or approaching enemies.9 Thoreau offers numerous descriptions of the place he chooses for his “experiment of living,” evidence that it contains critical elements of the optimal ancestral habitat (51). He builds his house “by the shore of a small pond” (86). The pond lies “in the midst of an extensive wood,” but Thoreau makes clear that this is a reforested area, with smaller, second-growth trees and plenty of cleared ground: “From a hill top near by, where the wood had been recently cut off, there was a pleasing vista southward across the pond, through a wide indentation in the hills” (86). In some directions he is closed in by “the woods which surrounded” him, but in others he enjoys more extensive prospects “over the near green hills to some distant and higher ones ... more distant mountain ranges in the north-west” (87). The house itself is located “on the side of a hill” and “on the edge of the larger wood”; a “narrow footpath” leads “down the hill” to the pond (113). There is “a narrow shelf-like path” completely “encircling the pond,” as well (180, 179). Describing his daily walks, he indicates that numer- ous paths and routes connect his home-base to other places of interest to him. In sum, his chosen location corresponds quite faithfully to ancestral prefer- ences. It abounds with animal and plant life, as well as with the critical resources of water and fuel. There are paths to facilitate movement to other places, as well as vantage points from which to survey more distant territory. Much of the open quality of Thoreau’s home-site is provided by the body of water at its center: the views beyond and across the pond create important visual space.10 8 Wilson, Biophilia, 107, 109, 111–13. 9 Judith H. Heerwagen and Gordon H. Orians, “Humans, Habitats, and Aesthetics,” in The Biophilia Hypothesis, ed. Stephen R. Kellert and Edward O. Wilson (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1993), 145-46; Roger S. Ulrich, “Biophilia, Biophobia, and Natural Landscapes,” in The Biophilia Hypothesis, ed. Stephen R. Kellert and Edward O. Wilson (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1993), 81-82, 89-90. 10 Ulrich, “Biophilia, Biophobia,” 82. 40 American Classics He notes with pleasure that in winter the frozen pond supplies him with “new ... routes to many points” and, just as important, with “new views ... of the familiar landscape” (271). In winter, his home looks more savanna-like than ever, with “snow lying deep on the earth dotted with young pines” and covering “the very slope of the hill on which my house is placed” (282). Thoreau discusses the importance of habitat evaluation and selection at length in the second chapter of his book, “Where I Lived, and What I Lived For.” Reporting briefly on his earlier attempt to purchase the Hollowell farm, he comments that people regularly make hypothetical decisions about suitable locations; they are ready “to consider every spot as the possible site of a house” (81). His insight points toward an adaptation that served humans well in the Environment of Evolutionary Adaptation (EEA): nomadic peoples needed to make habitat decisions repeatedly.11 Thoreau’s propensity to exalt the location he finally chooses lends biophilic energy to his discussion of his own selection process. He praises the site of his small homestead because it answers survival needs, enabling him to feed, shelter, clean, and warm himself, but at the same time he pays tribute to its intangible advantages. He demonstrates aesthetic appreciation of the site’s features, large and small, pointing out that the natu- ral resources he enjoys are beautiful as well as useful. The pond, for instance, serves him as a water supply, a mode of refrigeration, and a source of edible fish, but he also lauds Walden water for its “crystalline purity,” its “remarkable transparency,” its uniquely blue-green color, and the “rare beauty” of the “gold and emerald” pickerel that live in it (177, 178, 176, 285, 286). Because water is such a critical element in human habitats, Roger S. Ulrich reports, “both modern children and adults evidence strong preferences for scenes with water and are sensitive to certain optical properties of water in landscapes, especially glossiness.”12 Singling out the pond for sustained attention—aesthetic and spiritual, as well as scientific—and attaching spe- cial importance to the qualities of purity and transparency he observes in it, Thoreau demonstrates precisely this kind of sensitivity. He further glorifies his home by associating it with paradisiacal places and times: the Golden Age, the Castalian Fountain, the Garden of Eden (179). By means of such comparisons he underlines the desirability of the site dramatically, confirming the founda- tional importance of habitat to the human animal.13 11 Heerwagen and Orians, “Humans, Habitats,” 140. 12 Ulrich, “Biophilia, Biophobia,” 90. 13 Sherman Paul discusses in detail Thoreau’s use of paradisiacal allusions to invest Walden Pond with divine qualities. “A Fable of the Renewal of Life,” in Thoreau: A Collection of Critical Essays, ed. Sherman Paul (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1962), 109-10, 113-15. Biophilia in Thoreau’s Walden ChApTer 3 41 Studying Nature Wilson argues that we inherit the urge to study the living organisms around us—to learn as much as possible about their physiologies, life histo- ries, and behaviors—from ancestors whose survival depended upon the acqui- sition of such knowledge. As amateur naturalist, Thoreau demonstrates this particular biophilic inclination straightforwardly. In his close examination of animal and plant life, seasonal cycles and elemental processes, we see at work the human propensity to understand “the natural world as illuminated by the scientific method.”14 A patient and curious observer, Thoreau salutes “the necessity of being forever on the alert,” together with “the discipline of looking always at what is to be seen” (111). He reports on the appearance and behav- ior of wildlife in the area, including (among many others) mice, squirrels, ants, whippoorwills, jays, titmice, muskrats, ducks, and loons. He conducts exper- iments over time to discover how air bubbles become incorporated into ice; he keeps careful records of freezes and thaws, of high and low water-levels in near-by bodies of water: consistently he devotes attention to “sequence and verifiable patterns.”15 He goes to considerable trouble to refute the myth that Walden is a “bottomless” pond, fathoming its depths from a variety of positions (“more than a hundred” individual “soundings”) in order to chart the confor- mation of its basin (289). Frequently Thoreau suggests no immediate practical purpose to be served by the knowledge he acquires. He assumes that accumulating a store of information about the natural world, or at least the portion of it he inhabits, is interesting and valuable in and of itself. Such information may at some future time prove useful, as it does for the fisherman whose knowledge of insect life enables him to get good bait in winter. Even in the absence of pragmatic ben- efits, however, Thoreau communicates his conviction that studying the nat- ural environment is fundamentally important and compelling, that “knowing [other living creatures] well elevates the very concept of life.”16 He shows that 14 Wilson, Biophilia, 81. 15 Joan Burbick, Thoreau’s Alternative History: Changing Perspectives on Nature, Culture, and Language (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1987), 71. 16 Wilson, Biophilia, 22. Reviewing Thoreau’s revisions to the original draft of Walden, Buell indicates that these “show an irregular movement toward discovery, retrieval, and respect for the realm of physical nature whose substantial reality must be honored in the face of the desire to appropriate it for one’s own use.” “Thoreau and the Natural Environment,” in The Cambridge Companion to Henry David Thoreau, ed. Joel Myerson. (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 178. Commenting from a biographical per- spective, Krutch similarly concludes that Thoreau moved “away from the transcendental 42 American Classics such study demands substantial investment of time and intellectual effort, and it is an investment he makes with unfailing enthusiasm. The results of Thoreau’s exuberant yet rigorous investigatory activities occupy a considerable portion of his book. Increasingly his work has been acknowledged “in mainstream scientific literature.”17 He provides, for instance, “a model of forest succession as an ongoing process with discernible rules upon which reliable predictions may be founded” and demonstrates “other proper- ties of living communities [that] pointed straight toward the modern science of ecology.”18 Consistently he strives “to observe, order, and describe natural phenomena in temporal sequence” and thereby produce “a theory or law that explains a natural event.”19 “Next to us,” he confidently asserts, “the grandest laws are continually being executed” (134, Thoreau’s emphasis). His interest in discovering the principles governing natural growth and elemental processes sets him apart from numerous contemporaries who celebrated nature far less rigorously and systematically.20 Acquainted with pre-Darwinian versions of evolutionary theory,21 he demonstrated predictable “receptivity to Darwin’s Origin of Species,” reading it in 1860 and making “extracts from it.”22 “It seems clear,” as David M. Robinson asserts, “that Darwin’s depiction of the develop- ment of the forms of natural life tallied well with Thoreau’s sense of nature’s inexorable process of change, death, and renewal.”23 assumption that the meaning of nature can be reached by intuition and toward ... scien- tific assumption.” Henry David Thoreau (New York: William Sloan Associates, 1948), 175. Walls confirms and supports this assessment. Seeing New Worlds: Henry David Thoreau and Nineteenth-Century Natural Science, (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1995), 115. 17 Buell, Environmental Imagination, 363. 18 Ronald Wesley Hoag, “Thoreau’s Later Natural History Writings,” in The Cambridge Companion to Henry David Thoreau, ed. Joel Myerson (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 165; Edward O. Wilson, “Prologue: A Letter to Thoreau” in The Future of Life (New York: Vintage Books, 2002), xix. 19 Burbick, Thoreau’s Alternative History, 71. 20 In his rejection of the notion of spontaneous generation, Thoreau distinguished himself from contemporaries such as Horace Greeley, Louis Agassiz, and Ralph Waldo Emerson. Robert Kuhn McGregor, A Wider View of the Universe: Henry Thoreau’s Study of Nature (Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1997), 190. 21 Robert Sattelmeyer, Thoreau’s Reading: A Study in Intellectual History (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1988), 78-92. 22 Buell, Environmental Imagination, 363; Sattelmeyer, Thoreau’s Reading, 89. 23 David M. Robinson, “Thoreau, Modernity, and Nature’s Seasons,” in Thoreauvian Modernities: Transatlantic Conversations on an American Icon, ed. François Specq, Laura Dassow Walls and Michel Granger (Athens and London: University of Georgia Press, 2013), 78. Biophilia in Thoreau’s Walden ChApTer 3 43 Thoreau investigates a physical world largely tamed by human activity and thus radically unlike the EEA in many ways; his predominantly fearless attitude toward nature is keyed, realistically, to prevailing conditions. His exploration of nature includes appraisal, nevertheless, of its potentially deadly powers. Even in the settled countryside around Concord, long rid of bears and wolves, he reports struggles engendered by competition between and within species. He muses on the spectacle of “myriads” of creatures “suffered to prey on one another ... tender organizations ... serenely squashed out of existence” (318). The human race itself would be easily destroyed, he observes, by a small decrease in global temperatures: “a little sharper blast from the north ... would put a period to man’s existence” (254). He acknowledges nature’s destructive potential, balancing its “less peaceful” aspects against evidence of its “magna- nimity” and “abundance” (228, 166). Interpreting natural processes of decay and death from a “comprehensive perspective,” he emphasizes “the perpetual energy and dynamism of nature.”24 Aesthetics and Cognition Much research in the field of evolutionary psychology begins with the hypoth- esis that the ancestral environment exercised important influence on devel- opment of human cognitive powers, including development of the aesthetic sense. That hypothesis is generally consistent with Thoreau’s understandings and assumptions. The exploration of the physical environment to which much of his activity at Walden is dedicated reflects his certainty that “the mind of man thinks and develops by meeting and coming to terms with the world he lives in,” that human perceptions conform to evolved “cognitive frameworks.”25 Thoreau articulates such ideas most directly in connection with his apprecia- tion of nature’s beauty. Frequently he insists that the aesthetic pleasure con- veyed by natural phenomena is as valuable as their practical utility. He gathers wild grapes “more precious for their beauty and fragrance than for food” and cherishes the “brilliant fruit” of the barberry even though it provides “food for [his] eyes merely” (238). He anticipates currently prevailing cognitive theory, namely, that “the mind is innately prepared to receive [the] symmetry and 24 Robinson, “Thoreau, Modernity,” 74, 78. 25 Drake, “Walden,” 90; H. Daniel Peck, Thoreau’s Morning Work: Meaning and Perception in “A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers,” the Journal, and “Walden” (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1990), 82. 44 American Classics power” of natural phenomena26: admiring the “arching” grace of a local weed, wool-grass, he remarks that plant and animal life supplies “forms which art loves to copy” because of their “relation to types already in the mind” (310). He assumes that our capacity to respond to art is lodged “in our biology and in our relationship to other organisms.”27 Linking the human aesthetic response to natural designs, Thoreau states unequivocally that “a taste for the beautiful is most cultivated out of doors” (38). Moving his small assortment of “household effects” outside whenever he scrubs his floor, he comments that these “familiar objects” look “much more interesting” in this outdoor setting (113). This leads him to speculate that “these forms” (vines, leaves, pine cones, and the like) “came to be transferred to our furniture” as cherished embellishment because once we lived “in their midst” (113). He argues that we choose natural shapes as ornaments because of our long history of dependence on nature for everyday subsistence, that our aesthetic preferences are shaped by our involvement, as a species, with nature. Such comments are congruent with the theory that immersion in the ancestral environment exercised important influence on development of human psycho- logical responses. Universal Kinship Foundational to Thoreau’s natural philosophy is the conviction that he is bio- logically connected to all life forms. He expresses in the language of his day the idea, soon to be articulated systematically by Darwin, that humans are neither central nor special as a species, but part of a vast, global network of kinship. Without knowing the precise mechanisms of inheritance and variation, or of evolution by natural selection over time, he insists that he is organically related to everything on earth. Geneticists in succeeding generations have proven the validity of that claim: all life on the planet is descended from single-celled ancestors, and a verifiable genetic relationship therefore links even seemingly distant species.28 Thoreau rejoices in the fact of this profound and extensive connectedness, asking rhetorically, “am I not partly leaves and vegetable mould myself?” (138). Such declaration of kinship with the vegetable kingdom is not mere hyperbole, a pantheistically inspired figure of speech: throughout 26 Wilson, Biophilia, 61. 27 Ibid., 63. 28 Richard Dawkins, River Out of Eden: A Darwinian View of Life (New York: Harper Collins, 1995), 11-12. Biophilia in Thoreau’s Walden ChApTer 3 45 Walden he points implicitly toward the biophysical basis of the interconnec- tions he describes. Lawrence Stapleton distinguishes Thoreau from Emerson and other nineteenth-century transcendentalists in this respect, noting that while his contemporaries base their philosophy upon “the Platonizing idea of correspondences,” Thoreau maintains a naturalist’s focus on “the minute, the unseen or unnoticed resemblances or differences among concrete objects.”29 Consistently he establishes “a solid bottom,” a physical basis, for the “cosmic empathy” he expresses (330).30 Thoreau’s eccentric views on human agriculture can best be understood in the context of cross-species kinship. Instead of lamenting weather conditions unfavorable to farming, he takes an ecosystemic perspective, observing that if flooding rains should “cause the seeds to rot in the ground and destroy the pota- toes in the low lands,” there will be no cause to despair (131). Though destruc- tive to potatoes, such rain “would still be good for the grass on the uplands, and, being good for the grass, it would be good for me” (138, emphasis added). He is convinced, clearly, that he has a stake in the survival of wild grasses: his well- being is bound up with theirs. Although he initially characterizes woodchucks as “enemies” and his efforts to eradicate weeds as “a long war,” gradually he arrives at far less anthropocentric views (155, 161). The bean plants he has sown and hoed “grow for woodchucks partly,” he concludes, and his labor as a gardener has “results which are not harvested by [him]” but, rather, by mem- bers of other species (166).31 He similarly declines to value cultivated plants over wild ones. He regards the agricultural revolution with ambivalence for many reasons, not least because it is founded on the faulty premise of human supremacy. The fruits and vegetables tended so assiduously by farmers are not intrinsically more valuable than the indigenous plant life they replace, that “rich and various crop only unreaped by man” (158). Thoreau does not hesitate to assert that all life forms have equal claim on the elemental resources critical to plant growth, such as sun, rain, and nutrient-rich soil. “The sun looks on our cultivated fields and on the prairies and forests without distinction,” he points 29 Lawrence Stapleton, “Introduction,” in Thoreau: A Collection of Critical Essays, ed. Sherman Paul (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1962), 167. 30 Christie, Thoreau as World Traveler, 201. 31 This recognition of kinship with woodchucks does not stop Thoreau from later announcing a desire to “seize and devour” one “raw” (210). He explains his urge as principally a symbolic one: he is “hungry” to assimilate the “wildness” the animal embodies (210). Examining some twenty references to woodchucks in Walden, John Bird concludes that “respect” for this animal predominates. “Gauging the Value of Nature: Thoreau and His Woodchucks,” The Concord Saunterer, n.s., 2, no. 1 (1994), 141. 46 American Classics out; “in his view the earth is all equally cultivated like a garden” (166). If wild creatures eat his crops, or if his crops should die and be replaced by weeds, “whose seeds are the granary of the birds,” his loss will be compensated by the sustenance gained by other, non-human, animals whose survival is as import- ant as his own (166). Thoreau is motivated, evidently, by the principle now defined as inclusive fitness. As W. D. Hamilton was the first to demonstrate, individual fitness cannot not be measured merely by personal, or direct, reproductive success (i.e., number of offspring); rather, it includes the reproductive success of all those sharing genes with the target individual.32 The reproductive efforts of siblings, cousins, and collateral kin can raise appreciably the total number of genes an individual passes on to the next generation. Nepotistic behavior results from these facts: throughout the animal kingdom, individuals tend to help relatives, exhibiting a wide range of altruistic propensities, because assistance to relatives fosters the survival of shared genes. Thoreau communicates an evolutionarily expansive version of this principle when he identifies members of non-human species as kin: their fitness contributes to his. His conviction that “what is good for” other living things is also good for him demonstrates a highly developed sense of what Wilson refers to as “the phylogenetic continuity of life” and demonstrates alle- giance to a central principle of biophilia, namely, that “we are literally kin to other organisms.”33 “From a molecular point of view,” as Richard Dawkins emphasizes, “all animals are pretty close relatives of one another and even of plants.”34 Since “the relation between man and nature is reciprocal,” it follows that one need not rely solely on members of one’s own species to enjoy nepotistic benefits of community and companionship.35 As a naturalist, Thoreau investi- gates “interdependencies among species” and “mutual dependencies that made nature work.”36 As a writer, he employs a variety of rhetorical devices to lend vivid immediacy to an idea that would be articulated by later generations of ecol- ogists, namely, “all of the environment is a social environment;” there is “contin- uous reciprocity between humans and nature.”37 Thoreau moves to the woods, 32 Daly and Wilson, Sex, Evolution, 28-32. 33 Wilson, Biophilia, 130. 34 Dawkins, River, 12. 35 Stapleton, “Introduction,” 171. 36 McGregor, A Wider View, 4. 37 Aaron Katcher and Gregory Wilkins, “Dialogue with Animals: Its Nature and Culture,” in The Biophilia Hypothesis, ed. Stephen R. Kellert and Edward O. Wilson (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1993), 187; Kellert, “The Biological Basis,” 54. Biophilia in Thoreau’s Walden ChApTer 3 47 he tells readers, because he is “better known” there (19). He develops an “inti- mate ... acquaintance” with the weeds he eradicates from his garden; he shares his habitat with “the squirrel tribe” (161, 65). He hikes many miles “to keep an appointment with a beech-tree,” and pine needles “befriend” him (265, 132). He packs his book with instances of personification such as these, reporting on his daily involvement with nonhuman others and conveying a “sense of the neighborliness of nature.”38 As Thomas Pughe comments, such “anthropo- morphic tropes ... may figure, even epitomize, our inevitably intermingled and interdependent relations” with nonhuman nature.39 Affiliating with life forms commonly regarded as insentient, like beech trees or pigweed, Thoreau indulges in humorous hyperbole to celebrate planet-wide familial ties, using metaphor “to relay not merely intellectual, but total experi- ence,” to combine “scientific interest, environmental care, and aesthetic appre- ciation.”40 He lends human traits to elemental forces and processes as well as to plants and animals, rejoicing in “the friendship of the seasons,” or finding his loneliness assuaged by the other planets in the Milky Way (131, 133). At times he reverses his strategy, describing human nature or human occupations in terms of animal behavior, plant growth, or seasonal cycles. He compares the cellar of his house to the woodchuck den it replaces, for example, emphasizing common features in the shelters constructed by members of disparate species: “the house is still but a sort of porch at the entrance of a burrow” (45). He enjoys having time for his “thoughts ... to take root and unfold themselves” organi- cally, like a sprouting seed (132). Metaphorically yoking human and nonhuman phenomena, he attempts to persuade readers that humans are neither unique nor isolated in the ecosystem. Even in apparently “wild” and “dreary” s urroundings, he is supported by “the presence of something kindred” (13). 38 Buell, Environmental Imagination, 211. 39 Thomas Pughe, “Brute Neighbors: The Modernity of a Metaphor,” in Thoreauvian Modernities: Transatlantic Conversations on an American Icon, ed. François Specq, Laura Dassow Walls and Michel Granger (Athens and London: University of Georgia Press, 2013), 256. Scott McVay defends the anthropomorphism often associated with biophilic discussion—and obviously inherent in many of the rhetorical devices Thoreau favors—as a legitimate component of “acceptable science.” He contends that “any kind of deeper truth about the fellow organisms with whom we share space” requires some degree of “intimacy in observation and reporting.” Prelude: “A Siamese Connexion with a Plurality of Other Mortals,” in The Biophilia Hypothesis, ed. Stephen R. Kellert and Edward O. Wilson (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1993), 17. 40 Drake, “Walden,” 78; Pughe, “Brute Neighbors,” 254. 48 American Classics Walden Pond itself serves as the special focus of Thoreau’s figurative lan- guage: persistently he invests the pond with human characteristics. It is his “neighbor” and “bed-fellow” (86, 272); he refers to its “face,” “lips,” “beard,” “skin,” “lashes,” and “brows” (86, 311, 181, 294, 186). He likens the annual freezing and thawing of its waters to sleep or hibernation: in winter it “closes its eyes and becomes dormant,” and in spring it “stretch[es] and yawn[s] like a waking man” (282, 301). It commands the power, Thoreau asserts, of expressive emotion (“glee,” “joy and happiness”) and of mental activity: “liquid thought is welling up to its surface” (311,193). He endows it, finally, with meta- physical awareness, describing the annual thawing of the pond’s water in terms of spiritual regeneration: “Walden was dead and is alive again” (311). At the core of his book readers encounter “an almost animistic evocation of Walden as a living presence.”41 In portraying his central symbol, Thoreau persistently harnesses the force of metaphor to compel recognition of far-flung family, to insist upon equivalencies and commonalities linking the human animal with other portions of the biosphere. The Ecosystem as Living Entity Inclusive fitness theory typically predicts that affiliative and nepotistic ten- dencies will be correlated with genetic closeness: the more genes shared, the stronger the loyalties inspired. As discussion thus far has made clear, Thoreau operates according to a generous construction of kinship, egalitarian in spirit, one not regulated by mathematical calculations of relatedness. In Paleolithic populations, moreover, as researchers have noted, mortality rates would have left individuals, on average, with “many more distant kin than nuclear kin.” This fact would have fostered “increased mutualism or strong reciprocity among distant kin,” including an adaptive reliance on “the metaphor of kinship.”42 Humans regularly expand their perception of kinship networks, in fact, when they begin thinking of a coalition, tribe, or nation as a fraternity or brotherhood. A related phenomenon is that of fictional or ascribed kinship, which anthropol- ogists encounter world-wide. It is necessary only to extend an appreciation of relatedness slowly farther, step by step, to acknowledge even distant life forms 41 Buell, Environmental Imagination, 208. 42 Jeffrey A. Kurland and Steven J. C. Gaulin, “Cooperation and Conflict Among Kin,” in The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology, ed. David M. Buss (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2005), 457. Biophilia in Thoreau’s Walden ChApTer 3 49 as kin.43 We may begin with “selfish genes,” but we can utilize genetic ‘selfish- ness’ to widen rather than to narrow the range of our affiliations; we can extend our nepotistic loyalties “progressively outward until we end with the whole Earth.”44 From the perspective of evolutionary time, moreover, a narrow view of inclusive fitness makes little sense: “selves survive a little while; but all the while, really, the ecosystem in which the self lives is the fundamental unit of development.”45 Richard Dawkins describes “the river of DNA flowing down through the generations, only temporarily housed in particular bodies.”46 Taking the long view, “it seldom matters whether ... genes are inside me, inside my cousin, or inside a chimpanzee. Indeed, it may not matter whether they are inside me or inside an oyster or an ant.”47 This is precisely Thoreau’s point when he cheerfully relinquishes his crop to woodchucks, birds, or worms: “eco- centrism replaces egocentrism.”48 He subscribes to the notion that “selves have intertwined destinies with the landscapes they inhabit.”49 It was obvious to Thoreau, as Krutch maintains, “that man was a part of nature, not nature a part of man ... so that the merely human was swallowed up in the natural.”50 Thoreau’s pronounced propensity to assign feeling and intention to inor- ganic phenomena—water, ice, soil, rain, sun, wind—helps to demonstrate the holistic quality of his thinking. One species “merges into another, groups melt into ecological groups until the time when what we know as life meets and enters what we think of as non-life: barnacle and rock ... and rain and air.”51 His observations as a naturalist lead Thoreau to reflect upon resemblances he discovers across three seemingly disparate kingdoms. Waxing eloquent over the multitudinous shapes created in the flowing “sand and clay” of a thawing sandbank, he perceives essential commonalities in a wide variety of animal, vegetable, and mineral forms (304). He is struck in particular by the insight 43 For detailed discussion of the implications of planet-wide extended kinship, see Gordon M. Burghardt and Harold A. Herzog, Jr., “Beyond Conspecifics: Is Brer Rabbit Our Brother?” BioScience 30 (1980). 44 Holmes Rolston III, “Biophilia, Selfish Genes, Shared Values,” in The Biophilia Hypothesis, ed. Stephen R. Kellert and Edward O. Wilson (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1993), 381. 45 Rolston, “Biophilia, Selfish Genes,” 394; “Across a thousand years, the approximate thresh- old interval of evolutionary time,” Wilson points out, “individuals lose most of their relevance as biological units.” Biophilia 43-44, Wilson’s emphasis. 46 Dawkins, River, 28. 47 Rolston, “Biophilia, Selfish Genes,” 407. 48 Buell, Environmental Imagination, 155. 49 Rolston, “Biophilia, Selfish Genes,” 407. 50 Krutch, Henry David Thoreau, 186. 51 Kellert, “The Biological Basis,” 55. 50 American Classics that a single “principle,” or design, appears to serve as the basis for thousands of structures, animate and inanimate. “Citing foliation in all its forms as the essential type of natural growth,” he exults to witness how the “idea” of the leaf repeats itself with variations in a bird’s wing, a coral plant, a leopard’s paw, a bird’s foot, and an ice crystal, as well as in a human hand, ear, or lung (306).52 “Lava-like,” representations of all these forms are “bursting out” in ever shifting patterns of sand and clay: the base plan of all organic design seems vitally man- ifest in the soil itself (305). He puts forward a proposition resembling the Gaia hypothesis now garnering attention from ecologists: “all living beings together (the biota) behave as a single integrated system with properties more akin to systems of physiology than those of physics.”53 Engaging in linguistic playfulness and baroque elaboration throughout his much-admired encomium to the sandbank, Thoreau grounds his con- ceit, like his insights, in observed physical similarities.54 “While he does not speak the emerging language of natural selection or the modern language of biocentrism,” Robinson comments, “he is clearly beginning to conceptual- ize both these perspectives and consider their implications.”55 Saluting the 52 Hoag, “Thoreau’s Later Natural History,” 157. 53 Dorion Sagan and Lynn Margulis, “God, Gaia, and Biophilia,” in The Biophilia Hypothesis, ed. Stephen R. Kellert and Edward O. Wilson (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1993), 352. The idea of Gaia was initially put forward by James Lovelock in Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth (1979). Rpt. with new Preface, (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987). Leonard M. Scigaj and Nancy Craig Simmons point out that Thoreau’s insistence on “the biocentric value of all life” proves “surprisingly congruent with the central tenets of ecofem- inism” as well. “Ecofeminist Cosmology in Thoreau’s Walden.” Interdisciplinary Studies in Literature and Environment 1, no. 1 (1993): 121, 124. 54 This rich passage has generated comment from a variety of perspectives—psychological, historical, literary, linguistic, scientific, and religious; Gordon V. Boudreau ably summarizes and categorizes many of these in The Roots of “Walden” and the Tree of Life (Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press, 1990), see 125-31. Andrew McMurry addresses the passage at some length, emphasizing that “for Thoreau, what counts is the aliveness of the whole planet.” Environmental Renaissance: Emerson, Thoreau, and the Systems of Nature (Athens and London: University of Georgia Press, 2003), 135-40. According to Max Oelschlager, the passage illustrates Thoreau’s intuitive grasp of “fundamental evolutionary principles,” namely, that “complex forms evolve from simpler ones.” The Idea of Wilderness (New Haven: Yale University Press, 198), 164. Leo Marx discusses Thoreau’s “endless creation of new forms” here in the context of pastoral defiance of the machine age. The Machine in the Garden: Technology and the Pastoral Ideal in America (London and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1964), 262. Most intriguingly of all, perhaps, Boudreau points out that the passage seems to anticipate the final paragraph in The Origin of Species, where Darwin examines the teeming life represented on a single overgrown bank, noting the different yet interdependent “forms” it assumes. Roots of “Walden,” 127-28. 55 Robinson, “Thoreau, Modernity,” 74. Biophilia in Thoreau’s Walden ChApTer 3 51 diversity emerging from underlying unity, he goes on to personify “the earth”: “inwardly” it “labors with the central “idea” of leaf (306). Taking a panoramic view, as if he were looking down at the planet’s surface, he concludes that such a perspective would reveal “still vaster leaves,” with rivers forming the veins (307). The planet as a whole appears to be a macroscopic version of the shape that is everywhere manifest in individual earthly phenomena: “Gaia is simply symbiosis seen from space,” the “global life and environment, the planetary sur- face seen as body rather than place,” Sagan and Margulis similarly contend.56 Thoreau regards the planet itself as a living entity: “the earth is all alive and covered with papillae” (302). He presents a modern view of the ecosystem, which is “as real, as ultimate, as any genetic self.” 57 Arguing decisively against an anthropocentric approach to existence, Thoreau reminds readers that “the universe is wider than our views of it” (320). Even the planet we inhabit is but one in “a system of earths” (10). From first to last he urges us to make peace with our personal insignificance, to rec- ognize the “somewhat inconsequential roles” humans play “in the larger drama of which they are a part.”58 Asking us to hoe our beans in the “light” of cosmic vastness (10), he demonstrates a “philosophical humility largely absent from the predominant religions and philosophies of the day.”59 “All life, he feels, is one, and it is to the All, not merely the small human segment, that he wishes to belong.”60 The recognition of universal interconnectedness can prove liberat- ing, furthermore, because it reduces the importance of direct fitness. Since so much of the DNA in any one individual, even that in members of now extinct species, is passed on collaterally by all manner of distant relatives, the earth’s inhabitants, past, present, and future, in effect belong to a single, enormous gene pool.61 Regarded as a multifaceted yet coherent whole, nature manifests an “unequalled fertility,” Thoreau avers, and thus “is likely to outlive all her chil- dren” (137, 138). He rejoices in the reproductive success of his multitudinous kin, expressing implicit contentment with the high degree of inclusive fitness that he, like every organism on earth, inevitably enjoys. 56 Sagan and Margulis, “God, Gaia,” 352. 57 Rolston “Biophilia, Selfish Genes,” 396. 58 Robinson, “Thoreau, Modernity,” 80. In her analysis of Thoreau’s response to emerging evolutionary science, Nina Baym comes to different conclusions, arguing that Thoreau dis- cerned and repudiated the negative implications of Darwin’s work: he refused to accept “the irrelevance of man in the universe.” “Thoreau’s View of Science,” Journal of the History of Ideas 26, no. 2(1965), 234. 59 Robinson, “Thoreau, Modernity,” 80. 60 Krutch, Henry David Thoreau, 188. 61 Dawkins, River, 27-29; Wilson, Biophilia 43-44. 52 American Classics Taking this “wider ... view” of lineage enables Thoreau to assume a nonchalant attitude toward personal fitness and, significantly, toward ensu- ing competition in the social arena (320). Struggles to accumulate resources and achieve status may be motivated by proximate goals of various kinds, but the ultimate goals such struggles serve are those of direct fitness: mating and reproduction. Individuals who succeed in building wealth and reputation enjoy enhanced mating opportunities and command means to rear offspring success- fully.62 Thoreau’s indifference to individual reproductive success, which reflects his perception of the extensive kinship network linking all organic life, permits him to reject “the kind of life men praise and regard as successful” (19). He need not seek to acquire elite employment, prestigious alliances, luxurious furniture, imported foods, or fashionable apparel. From the perspective of “ecological and then evolutionary change,” as Wilson observes, moment-by-moment con- cerns of “biography and political events ... shrink steadily in proportion.”63 The sources of Thoreau’s disaffection with the materialism, technophilia, and pro- fessionalism dominating mid-nineteenth-century America are many-stranded, inevitably, but his biocentric analysis of the human condition provides a firm foundation for his stalwart rejection of social rewards and encumbrances.64 Inevitably, his disparagement of community values includes unstated defiance of typical life-history assumptions: he pays scant attention in Walden to mating and parenthood, issues generally regarded as central to human endeavor. In his encounter with John Field’s large and hungry family, he indi- cates that his principles for living might well be consistent with providing for dependents, but he does not tackle the question directly.65 Biographers have sought to account for his silence on this topic, speculating that romantic disap- pointment, homoerotic yearnings, or sexual squeamishness, for instance, might account for it.66 Such explanations, whether true or not, fail to place Thoreau’s 62 Buss, Evolution of Desire: 22-27, 46-48, 59, 285-86. 63 Wilson, Biophilia, 144. 64 See discussions of Thoreau’s economic philosophy by Leo Stoller and Michael T. Gilmore. Leo Stoller, After “Walden”: Thoreau’s Changing Views on Economic Man (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1957); Michael T. Gilmore, “Walden and the ‘Curse of Trade,’” in Critical Essays on Henry David Thoreau’s Walden, ed. Joel Myerson (Boston: G.K. Hall, 1988). 65 Krutch notes that “there is no evidence to suggest that Thoreau ... advocated universal celi- bacy.” Thoreau acknowledges that a person with dependents “would need more than he did ... but such a man would also ... need less than he thought.” Henry David Thoreau, 88. 66 Llewelyn Powys, for one, suggests that Ellen Sewell’s rejection of Thoreau’s marriage pro- posal “helped to dry up his already somewhat sapless nature.” “Thoreau: A Disparagement,” in Critical Essays on Henry David Thoreau’s “Walden,” ed. Joel Myerson (Boston: G.K. Hall, 1988), 55. Richard Bridgman also comments on Thoreau’s possible sexual timidity, “his Biophilia in Thoreau’s Walden ChApTer 3 53 attitude toward marriage and children in the larger context of the “kindred- ship ... in Nature” he consistently celebrates (159). As Joseph Wood Krutch justly remarks, “Thoreau himself would have been astonished at the sugges- tion that a passion for nature was inexplicable except on the theory that it sub- stituted for some other passion which had been frustrated.”67 He constructs no argument against individual reproductive efforts; he adopts a perspective, rather, from which these may come to seem relatively unimportant. Given the universal relatedness everywhere manifest in the natural world, genetic con- tinuity is inevitable. It is planetary life as whole that is valuable, Thoreau sug- gests, rather than the continued existence of any one individual or species. The task of eco-proliferation is so broadly shared that the contribution of any one organism is miniscule. Affiliating with the “great central life” of the planet, he construes family and, by extension, fitness, in the widest possible sense (309). In considering whether such insistence on universal kinship and corre- sponding disinterest in personal fitness might prove to be adaptive, prevailing environmental conditions must be taken into account. During the nineteenth century, the human population was experiencing such unprecedented growth that the species, together with its technological modifications of habitat, was beginning to threaten the well-being of the planet. Thoreau lived and wrote at a moment when it became possible for persons with scientific knowledge and imaginative sensibilities to realize the threat humans posed to the natural world and, concomitantly, to their self-interest as a species.68 In the decades since his death, human activity has precipitated wide-scale extinctions, polluted ground- water, lakes, and oceans, and punctured the protective layer of ozone. Meanwhile human population growth has continued to accelerate. Modern environmen- talists consequently support principles that elevate planetary fitness above per- sonal fitness, emphatically endorsing the point of view Thoreau adopted on the basis of evidence available in his day.69 Rolston, for one, argues that our species needs to be “released from an ethics that is nothing but selection for maximum inability to come to terms with the quite powerful feelings that were tormenting him.” Dark Thoreau (Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press, 1982), 119. Walter Harding points out that Thoreau “delighted in jibing at women and at marriage,” speculating that he “was able to sublimate his love for the opposite sex in a worship of the world of nature.” The Days of Henry Thoreau, rev. ed. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1982), 110, 104. 67 Krutch, Henry David Thoreau, 33. 68 See Walls, Seeing New Worlds, 187-88. 69 Edward O. Wilson, “Biophilia and the Conservationist Ethic,” in The Biophilia Hypothesis, ed. Stephen R. Kellert and Edward O. Wilson (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1993), 39-40; Kellert, “The Biological Basis,” 65. 54 American Classics production of human offspring” in order to affirm “biophilia and concern for environmental integrity.”70 From the perspective of twenty-first-century readers, a nepotism divorced from egocentric weighting looks more adaptive than “fanci- ful.”71 Determined to “live deliberately,” Thoreau in effect proposes a conscious reconfiguring of evolved mechanisms for kin selection (90). Competition and Conservation A sense of cosmic kinship tends to reduce the intensity of competition between individuals and between species, at the same time fostering a conservationist spirit.72 Thoreau clearly is committed to biodiversity, a crucial component of twenty-first-century environmentalism, and he manifests a concomitantly respectful and protective attitude toward all life forms. His appreciation of the intrinsic, intangible value in every insect, shrub, rodent, and pebble dovetails as well with emerging awareness of the “nonmonetary ... value” of natural resources.73 Refusing to “carry the landscape ... to market,” he valorizes the non-commercial benefits it yields (196). Wilson credits Thoreau with having articulated “the first elements” of “a global land ethic.”74 Thoreau insists, more- over, that “nature is not elsewhere, but everywhere, and all the land holy, not just a few last, best places.”75 His noncompetitive philosophy is further buttressed by his often expressed confidence that nature’s plenty is inexhaustible, more than sufficient for the needs of all the earth’s diverse inhabitants. He tells his readers that it costs “incredibly little trouble to obtain one’s necessary food,” even in a New England climate, if one adopts “as simple a diet as the animals” (61). If one aspires only to self-sufficiency, losses sustained to other creatures during the growth or storage of crops become manageable. The individual who can “do with less” is “richer” indeed, better equipped for survival in a world of volatile natural forces, than one who requires more (23). Biophilic philosophy accounts in large measure for Thoreau’s conviction that the quest to a ccumulate resources 70 Rolston, “Biophilia, Selfish Genes,” 412. 71 Buell, Environmental Imagination, 128. 72 Wilson, Biophilia, 131-32; Rolston, “Biophilia, Selfish Genes,” 410-13. 73 Ulrich, “Biophilia, Biophobia,” 115. 74 Wilson, “Prologue: A Letter,” xxiv, xxiii. 75 Laura Dassow Walls, “Believing in Nature: Wilderness and Wildness in Thoreauvian Science,” in Thoreau’s Sense of Place: Essays in American Environmental Writing, ed. Richard J. Schneider (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 2000), 24. Biophilia in Thoreau’s Walden ChApTer 3 55 in excess of need (“more warmth ... richer food, larger and more splendid houses”) is unnatural and unsatisfying (15). Information he obtained through his reading about diverse human cultures, ancient and modern, further convinced him that “the basic necessities of man’s physical life had not changed much over the long course of the centuries; even the means of acquiring them had changed less than might be supposed.”76 In his discussions of railroad workers or displaced aboriginal populations, he offers evidence that the human animal’s pursuit of material luxury has led to the many miseries associated with social and economic stratification, “the luxury of one class ... counterbalanced by the indigence of another” (34). Advocating a cross-species sharing of planetary resources, Thoreau clearly is convinced that he will not lose everything to weevils or woodchucks: he can afford to share because there always will be enough left for him. A committed locovore before his time, he advises readers to minimize the effort needed to sustain themselves by relying on locally available foods rather than “depend on distant and fluctuating markets” (63). He points out that it is cheapest and most efficient to plant those crops already adapted to regional growing condi- tions. Hence, grains like rye and corn contribute significantly to his diet, and he proves by experimentation that he can make or obtain, on the spot, a number of foods that his neighbors import at considerable cost and inconvenience. He can make sweeteners from home-grown “pumpkins or beets,” for instance, or tap local maple trees for syrup (64); he notes that he could get his own salt without traveling far. Repeatedly he identifies unutilized local resources. He also makes use of wild foods, sustaining himself in part with nuts, berries and wild apples he collects in the vicinity of his Walden home; during his first year there he also eats fresh-caught fish. He is a knowledgeable gath- erer, utilizing his familiarity with his habitat to exploit its resources effectively. Instead of regarding squirrels solely as competitors, for example, he respects them as allies in the quest for food and profits from their instinctive knowledge: he gleans their “half-consumed nuts” because “the burrs they had selected were sure to contain sound [centers]” (238). He locates groundnuts and acorns in the vicinity, preparing sample batches in Native American fashion. He does not adopt either as a staple in his diet, but he is glad to discover that such food sources, currently unexploited, are readily available. His goal is to make plain the many unused or under-utilized food sources all around us in the natural 76 Christie, Thoreau as World Traveler, 215. 56 American Classics world, to recognize the “promise of Nature to rear her own children and feed them simply” (239). He goes on to remind us that cultivated crops are far more vulnerable to ecological disasters than are wild-growing plants. If “wild Nature” were to “reign” again, he warns, “the tender and luxurious English grains will probably disappear before a myriad of foes ... but the now almost exterminated ground- nut will perhaps revive and flourish ... and resume its ancient importance and dignity as the diet of the hunter tribe” (239). His cautions sound eerily like those E. O. Wilson would make in the 1980’s: “we have come to depend completely on less than 1 percent of living species for our existence, with the remaining waiting untested and fallow.”77 Thoreau is determined to undertake such neglected testing, to explore the extent of nature’s bounty. He would be unsurprised by the statistics biologists currently have amassed: they estimate the existence of “at least 75,000” sources of unutilized but edible vegetation, “and many of these are superior to the crop plants in use.”78 For readers living in a natural world largely “cut to pieces, mowed down, plowed under, gobbled up,” his experiment in simplicity, with its emphasis on appreciative investigation of local resources, appears ever more prescient, an adaptive response to environ- mental deterioration.79 Nature’s Mysteries Despite the constant quest to investigate nature that has characterized humans since hunter-gathering days, our species is dismayed by the prospect of know- ing or taming the natural world completely. This is an intriguing aspect of the biophilia hypothesis, one Wilson considers at some length. “The greater the knowledge” we acquire about the natural world, he muses, “the deeper the mys- tery” that remains—and we would have it no other way: “Nature is to be mas- tered, but (we hope) never completely.”80 Thoreau’s views on this point mirror Wilson’s: “At the same time that we are earnest to explore and learn all things, we require that all things be mysterious and unexplorable, that land and sea be infinitely wild, unsurveyed and unfathomed by us because unfathomable” (317-18). We require contact with “the vastness and strangeness of nature,” he maintains (171). Life in towns and cities is tenable only because the world of 77 Wilson, Biophilia, 132. 78 Ibid., 132. 79 Wilson, “Prologue: A Letter,” xxii. 80 Wilson, Biophilia, 10. Biophilia in Thoreau’s Walden ChApTer 3 57 nature remains accessible. “Our village life would stagnate if it were not for the unexplored forests and meadows which surround it,” Thoreau declares: “we need the tonic of wildness” (317). Even the spectacle of violent interspecies competition assures us of nature’s “inexhaustible vigor” (318). Luckily, Thoreau reminds his readers, they need not go far from settled communities to find hidden pockets of “strangeness”: “It is remarkable how many creatures live wild and free though secret in the woods, and still sustain themselves in the neighborhood of towns, suspected by hunters only” (227). Only our own apathy can prevent us from investigating and enjoying nature’s rich variety: “there is an incessant influx of novelty into the world, and yet we tolerate incredible dulness” (332). Thoreau anticipates Wilson’s contention that “our intrinsic emotions drive us to search for fresh habitats, to cross unexplored terrain,” asserting that “we still crave the sense of a mysterious world stretching infinitely beyond.”81 Nature as Restorative Biophilia theory culminates in the proposition that humans need to foster a relationship with nature in order to enjoy full psychological and emotional health. “There can be no very black melancholy,” Thoreau asserts, “to him who lives in the midst of Nature and has his senses still” (131). Although we live daily lives that are very disconnected, for the most part, from the natural world, Wilson reminds us that “the brain evolved into its present form over a period of about two million years ... during which people existed in hunter-gatherer bands in intimate contact with the natural environment.”82 From these ances- tors we inherit an inclination to involve ourselves with the natural world, to learn about it, to grapple with its dangers, beauties, and mysteries. Examining the adaptive value of close contact with the natural environment from a “func- tional-evolutionary perspective,” Ulrich concludes that such contact fosters a “recharging of energy” and thus may “enhance survival chances.”83 Even simple enjoyment of “the quiet motion of pond life,” research suggests, may promote “physiological relaxation” or “better problem solving.”84 Some of the most compelling research supporting the biophilia hypothesis explores the psycho- logical and physiological damage caused by humans’ increasing disconnection 81 Ibid., 76. 82 Ibid., 101. 83 Ulrich, “Biophilia, Biophobia,” 98, 99. 84 Katcher and Wilkins, “Dialogue with Animals,” 177. 58 American Classics from nature, together with the manifold benefits to be obtained by deliberate acts of reconnection.85 Predisposed to associate nature with vital, even curative, energies, humans invest it with significance: “we are in the fullest sense a biological species,” Wilson explains, “and will find little ultimate meaning apart from the remainder of life.”86 One of Thoreau’s chief purposes is to communicate exactly this con- viction. Persistently he compares natural phenomena to celestial ones, invest- ing nature with transcendent significance by means of metaphor and analogy. Declaring that “Olympus is but the outside of the earth every where,” he assures us that the natural world we live in is, in very fact, supernaturally wondrous (85). “Reflecting the sky,” Walden Pond is “a lower heaven” (86). Its water is compara- ble to “the sacred water of the Ganges,” endowed by implication with holy and healing effects (298). Associating a humble New England pond with regenera- tive potency, Thoreau demands awe and reverence for the natural world in its most commonplace manifestations. His strategy is to insist that the ordinary is extraordinary: the ponds near his home are “great crystals on the surface of the earth, Lakes of Light,” more valuable than “the diamond of Kohinoor” (199). The common trees in his neighborhood, whether pine, or black-birch, or dog- wood, are “temples” or “shrines,” inspiring “worship” (201, 202). Involving himself in natural cycles of regeneration, he, the human is rein- vigorated: like the thawing pond, he finds that he is “alive again.” Likening the “coming in of spring” to “the creation of Cosmos out of Chaos and the realiza- tion of the Golden Age,” he places the re-making of the natural world, which occurs each year, in a profound context (313).87 Marveling at nature’s energies, Thoreau expresses “the cathedral feeling” Darwin described in response to seeing the results of nature’s prolixy in a tropical forest: “wonder, astonishment, and sublime devotion, fill & elevate the mind.”88 Readers of Walden encoun- ter the same expression of reverence and awe in Thoreau’s evocations of the 85 Some of this research is presented and discussed in The Biophilia Hypothesis; see essays by Katcher and Wilkins, by Ulrich, by Orr, and by Kellert. 86 Wilson, Biophilia, 81. 87 Many readers have discussed the centrality of the theme of rebirth in Walden, analyzing the analogies, and metaphors Thoreau invokes in this context. See commentary by Paul, “A Fable of the Renewal of Life”; Lauriat Lane Jr., “On the Organic Structure of Walden,” in Critical Essays on Henry David Thoreau’s “Walden,” ed. Joel Myerson (Boston: G. K. Hall, 1988), 74-76; Stanley Edgar Hyman, “Henry Thoreau in Our Time,” in Thoreau: A Collection of Critical Essays, ed. Sherman Paul (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice- Hall, 1962), 28-29; Drake, “Walden,” 72-74. 88 Quoted in Wilson, Biophilia 27. Biophilia in Thoreau’s Walden ChApTer 3 59 natural environment in Concord, Massachusetts. Nineteenth-century versions of pantheism provide him with a vehicle to exalt the regenerative organic inter- connectedness he discovers everywhere around him.89 Biophilia and Walden Point for point, Thoreau articulates in his book ideas and values compatible with those Edward O. Wilson would gather together under the concept of “biophilia” more than a hundred years later. He expresses the foundational bio- philic conviction that every individual needs a close relationship with nature, in all its wildness and variety, in order to thrive, and he further implies that this need is an inherent part of human nature. He argues in passionate detail that “improved means” of agriculture, industry, and technology have disrupted the original relationship between the human species and the natural world (52). As corrective, he undertakes an experimental re-immersion in nature, demon- strating how the experience contributes to increased emotional health, mental alertness, aesthetic pleasure, and psychic renewal. Investigating his immediate environment closely, he offers evidence that all living organisms and elemen- tal phenomena are kin; he comes to appreciate his position as an individually insignificant member of a coherent ecological whole. He acts on these percep- tions by extending nepotistic affiliations and loyalties beyond himself and even beyond his species, concluding that all life forms have equal claim on planetary resources. Thus he rejects anthropocentrism. Instead he highlights conserva- tionist principles, particularly that of biodiversity; he models living simply and without waste, relying on local resources. At the same time, he promotes the idea of interaction and sharing across species. Adopting “wider ... views” of fitness, he celebrates a planet-wide network of ancestry and descent; in this larger context, he implies, personal 89 There is a discernible line of causal connection between Romantic philosophy, particularly its idealization of nature, and the changes precipitated in Europe and America by rapid growth in industry and technology. Emerging just as natural environments were undergoing radical degradation, Romanticism expresses a collective response to thwarted biophilia. It forms a critical part of the biocultural framework in which Thoreau’s views take shape. Robert Sattelmeyer justly observes that “a thoroughgoing Transcendentalist naturalist would find it easier to accept organic evolution than special creation,” including a “dynamic” rather than a hierarchical conception of nature. Thoreau’s Reading, 88. “Holism ... pervaded romantic sci- ence,” moreover, as William Rossi emphasizes. “Thoreau’s Transcendental Ecocentrism,” in Thoreau’s Sense of Place: Essays in American Environmental Writing, ed. Richard J. Schneider (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 2000), 32. 60 American Classics reproduction is an irrelevant goal. The individual organism is merely “a sojourner in nature” (37). Thoreau’s evolutionarily expansive understanding of inclusive fitness not only supports ecosystemic health, it frees him from competition for status and wealth in the social environment. Ignoring or reject- ing the personal reproductive goals motivating so much human behavior, he extricates himself from a host of societal constraints and directives.90 Biophilia provides the logical launching-ground for his socioeconomic philosophy, ren- dering explicable, in fitness terms, behavior that otherwise might be labeled maladaptive. Indeed, his powerful identification with the well-being and conti- nuity of the biosphere as a whole serves as necessary context for his most con- troversial social criticisms and personal abnegations. 90 Readers long have tended to dichotomize Thoreau’s ideas, attempting to explain the “dis- tance between the social and the natural” in his thinking: Sharon Cameron, Writing Nature: Henry Thoreau’s “Journal” (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985), 24. He enjoys “two separate reputations,” as social critic on the one hand, and as nature writer on the other: Krutch, Henry David Thoreau, 287. Exploring the supposed “nature/culture opposi- tion” in his thinking, readers wonder whether his work “is meant as an appeal from culture for nature, or as a reproach from nature against culture”: McMurry, Environmental Renaissance, 121, 131. Viewed through the lens of biophilia, the relationship between these two thematic strains in Walden becomes much clearer. Thoreau “subordinates human presence” to an all-encompassing affiliation with the natural world: Cameron, Writing Nature, 154.