 Foreword "Talk of mysteries! Think of our life in nature — daily to be shown matter, to come in contact with it — rocks, trees, wind on our cheeks! the solid earth! the actual world! the common sense! Contact! Contact! Who are we? Where are we?" — Henry David Thoreau Walden Hog wild. It was an outrageous name for an outrageous notion: that several families might form a loose confederation of homesteaders, buy a big chunk of land, build our own homes and become as self-sufficient as practically possible. The early 1970s was a time of a quiet green revolution in the back- woods of America. In the front lines were the former campus activists of the '60s, the retired demonstrators for Civil Rights, the tired protest- ers against the Viet Nam war, and the disillusioned political critics of a federal government perceived as increasingly and inherently adversar- ial, if not downright evil. We had repaired to the country where we turned our considerable energy loose on a smaller, more manageable scale. If we couldn't save the world, then we'd work on improving our own world in a small and intensely personal way; we would make our lives harmonious with nature and the physical world as we found it. It was a notion that fired our times and our minds with a righteous zeal and a sense of profound purpose. We went back to basics. Back to the land. This is the story of how we joined with five other families on 300 acres in a dream of building our own homes with virtually no previous carpentry experience. It was, as the place came to be known, Hogwild. Located just east of the rocky flanks of the Blue Ridge Mountains in western North Carolina's Rutherford County, we could have the best of both worlds: the isolation of the mountains yet without the temperature extremes of the high country immediately west of us. XThe view west from Hogwild toward Hickory Nut Gorge. Philosophically and in practice, we were not so much a commune as we were a community; a spontaneous rural assembly of like-minded young coots with families to raise, houses to build, and dreams to try. And we weren't afraid to be a little bit outrageous. However, we were nothing like the stereotypical version of the '70s commune popularized by Hollywood as inhabited by chronically stoned pot-heads stumbling around obliviously in the woods, mumbling noth- ing more profound than "cool, man," and sharing everything from property to non-exclusive affections. At Hogwild, we each owned our own land and lived within the traditional contexts of our marriages. As a community, we had log house-raisings, skinny-dipping in the river, frolicking nights of country music of our own making, weddings in the woods, and parties on the lawn. We shared our tools, our muscles, our time, and the land that was Hogwild. We were bound together by our common interest in organic foods, our dedication to conservation and environmental sanity, and our desire to provide our children with an appropriate place in which to grow up. Spiritually and philosophically as builders of our own shelter and caretakers of our own land (as opposed to owners), we were most influenced by Eastern thought and by Native American gentleness. We joked about belonging to the Southern Buddhist Church. But that would have offended my bearded ancestors in the Friends Meeting House, so I concluded somewhat in jest that if I had to reduce my faith to a phrase, XI then it would be Zen-Quaker. With maybe a touch of Cherokee on the side. If we were a part of a movement or a cause or a national phenome- non, we certainly didn't know it. There was no newsletter for whoever or whatever we were becoming: "Homesteaders" or so-called "Back-to- the-Landers." We at Hogwild simply felt we were bound together on a private journey in wood. If we were pioneers, we were unwitting ones; I doubt that pioneers grasp their own uniqueness anyway. That perspective is a luxury of a hindsight we couldn't have at that time. What is clear now is that we were caught up in the creative confluence of a synergy that resulted in some amazing houses and some equally amazing times. Like others, I found quiet inspiration and sustenance from publica- tions — not so counter-culture as new culture — such as the Whole Earth Catalog, and Mother Earth News, (which we scoffed at for its "Hey Gang, you can build a house of mudpies in a day" brand of gee-whiz journal- ism). Most importantly, Eliot Wigginton's first Foxfire book (1972) with its chapter on log cabin building, Eric Sloane's An Age of Barns and Art Boericke's The Woodbutcher's Art, the Guide to Handmade Houses, all combined to free me from my conventional thinking of how a place should or could be built. From the very beginning, log cabins have been in my genes. My great-grandfather Nixon Rush, the Quaker minister, was born in the log house (1836) that his father built east of Shepperds Mountain in Ran- dolph County, N.C. Old Rush was an adventurer who took off for the Colorado Silver Rush of 1859 before settling the family farm, "Rush Hill," in rural Indiana. His son, my grandfather Charles, restored a log cabin in the '20s in Indiana for a summer retreat away from his career as a university li- brarian. As a boy, I built "houses" out of orange crates, packing boxes and old tin sheeting, and these propped-up knee-high shanties had the pro- clivity of collapsing about me with a great clamor as I crawled in. This is basic instinct, says Bradford Angier, in his fine book, Build- ing Your Own Cabin in the Woods. Angier suggests that the impulse of building is so intrinsic to the human spirit that we see it reflected in the role-play of small boys — building clubhouses, tree houses — any sort of slapdash place to call their own. As a boy growing in the confines of a university town during those formative years, my link to all things woodsy was Scouting in general xn Campus folksingers of the '60s, "Jock Bill and Jeanette Byers, the "King and and Maggie" are ready by 1974 to Queen of Hogwild," with daughter, put songs and dreams into the reality Hannah, in the winter of'1974. of wood, rock, and mortar. and Troop 39 in particular. The outfit provided me with a confidence in myself and my abilities to live comfortably in a wild setting. Plus, Scouting provided me with the male role modeling and the sort of wilderness experiences that my single parent mother couldn't give me. Troop 39, not so cointidentally, was a pioneering troop, specializing in the skills of lashing pine logs into 20-foot-tall signal towers with an elaborate rope monkey bridge strung from the ground up to one tower, across to the other tower, and down to the ground on the far side. To an 11-year-old pudgy kid, this edifice took on DeMilleian scale. As an adolescent, I became something of a professional Scout, as was the custom in our troop, becoming a leader of younger boys, wise to the ways of the woods, earning my Eagle rank and staying with the troop until I was 16. Building the cabin was the ultimate expression and extension of my Scouting experience. But still, none of this would have happened had it not been for Mag- gie — the girl who bowled me over at a University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill campus meeting where students were taking their turns in- troducing themselves invariably as Susie Q. from Charlotte or John J. from Raleigh, and so forth — cities so big we didn't even need to be re- minded what state they were in... And when it came her turn, this raven- haired beauty stood up and announced simply: "I'm Maggie Palmer, and I'm from the Mountains!" xiii She was from a town so small back up in the mountains that she knew no one had ever heard of Crossnore (pop. 250) and she wasn't about to be humiliated by all those city slickers. From the first time I saw her proudly proclaiming her "moun- tainess," I was, as my friend Tom Callison says, "all eat up." We became folksingers together, fell in love and were wed. From the start we shared the dream of going to the mountains and having a weekly newspaper. By 1973 we had realized this dream. Maggie and I had been married for seven years. Our wildling daughter, Selena, was five. The weekly newspaper, This Week, started by two friends and I in 1969, was flourishing. Without knowing it, we had become: YURPies (Young Upwardly-mobile Rural Professionals). The decision to go Hogwild was the result of myriad influences. One of those events was my cathartic interview for a job as a photogra- pher with National Geographic magazine in November 1973. After look- ing at my work and at several year's worth of bound volumes of This Week, the magazine's director of photography, Robert Gilka, told me This Week was one of the finest papers of its kind he'd ever seen, and he asked me if I would leave it to move to D.C. Whether the question was rhetorical or specific, it didn't matter. Leave my paper?! How could I do that and live in Washington, D.C.? Within me, a country mouse vs. city mouse debate raged briefly. But in the end it was no contest. My course as a country editor was already plotted and I suspect Mr. Gilka knew that very well. Yet the funny thing was, I got the distinct impression from the wistful look on Gilka's face as he leafed through my papers that he would have liked to have been in my shoes — and that he wouldn't have left his blooming country weekly in the hills of the Southern Appalachians either. In that winter of 1973-'74, with our growing awareness of the earth's finite resources and our second house just having received the horrific moniker of a "total electric home," we both began to become susceptible to a drastic alteration in our means of shelter. We began to feel that we were little more than caretakers and financial trustees of our present, energy-hogging house with its big drafty halls, high ceilings, leaky windows, and a fireplace with such a draw that it could suck all the heat out of the house as fast as the base- board units could crank it out. It is said that creative change for the better is stimulated by dissat- isfaction with one's present state, and we were ripe for the revolution. Maggie and I began to suspect that there were basic rules of shelter xiv dynamics we'd never dreamed of before. Here's one: Lauterer's Law of Site Specifics: That your shelter and the particular dynamics, configuration, location, style, mood, lighting — all combine to form a total ethos that dictates to a great extent the behavior of its inhabitants. Or, to borrow a turn of phrase from the health folk: you are where you live. So, we wondered, what if the owner-builder could be active instead of passive, as is usually the case in our dwellings, and dictate his own life and style by fashioning and forming a structure up and around that philosophical and intellectual core long before the first napkin-blueprint is ever drawn. This was the basic precept of Hogwild, and this, more than cinder- blocks, was the foundation for our house. What a thought: that you don't build houses and stick people in them willy-nilly; but rather you take a person or a family and build the house around them as an extension of their personal and corporeal identities. No wonder the house's gestation period was the same as a high school or college under- graduate education. We didn't build this cabin so much as we raised it and nurtured it. Long before the first shovelful of dirt was moved, before the first nail pounded or the first log laid, this house was sensed — much as a mother-to-be can sense the tiny seed of the embryo long before its presence is officially confirmed. We felt this house deep down, dreamed of it, envisioned it to be the vital, vibrant, nurturing, creation-inspiring and life-supporting homeplace that would itself became a living entity. Such a house was Tom. Not that he had a name, much less a gender, early on. But surely the old barn possessed an innate personality: honesty, authenticity, durabil- ity and sort of a stout hardiness. So that even as we saw him that first blustery winter day in 1974, all bedraggled with vines, Tom still beck- oned. During the four years it took to build Tom, a lot was going on professionally as well as personally. For one thing, I was losing my hair, and after a couple of years of combing what has been called "a dime's worth of hair over a dollar's worth of head," I decided to take matters in my own hands, so to speak, and I shaved my head. Still do. At the paper, we became recognized as the best non-daily newspa- per in the state. And during this period, we purchased a press and bought out our competition as well. At the same time, I was beginning to understand the importance of XV gathering and printing oral history and the development of my brand of what I call "folkloric photojournalism." Those weekly features resulted in two books, Wouldn 't Take Nothin 'for My Journey Now in 1980 (the Uni- versity of North Carolina Press) and Runnin' on Rims in 1986 (Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill). Without quite realizing it, I came to live the style of those about whom I was writing. Building the cabin gradually evolved into the ultimate expression of who I was, who we were corporally, of our adopted countryness, and of my work. Professionally these years encompassed a tremendously prolific and creative body of work as a photographer and writer. I can't help sus- pecting that Hogwild's energy had something to do with that "good karma," as we called it. As co-publisher and co-editor at This Week, I had the luxury of rambling on (and on) in weekly columns in which I regularly prosely- tized for the homesteading way of life while writing about Tom's progress. Readers came to know Tom as sort of an extension of their own house. "How's the cabin comin'?" they'd say to me on the street, and: "Read about it in the paper." Folks seemed to enjoy it, although fellow journalists kidded me unmercifully for that. "You're the only reporter I know who can put up one log and get 20 inches of copy out of it," jabbed my buddy Roy Thompson of the Winston-Salem Journal. I reckon I deserved it, but every hour I wasn't working on the paper I spent out there in the woods with Old Tom. Were we obsessed? How can I answer that? At lunch we drew designs and "blueprints" on napkins and check receipts. While covering city council meetings I doodled fanciful drawings of cabins amid the notes of subdivision regulations and zoning appeals. For four years we were immersed in a project that demanded our very best if we were to realize its completion. And we were totally committed to that dream. It took all the extra energy we had — but at the same time, the expenditure sustained and nurtured us. From the very start, Maggie had the foresight and vision to hint broadly that I should keep a diary of the house building by giving me a journal whose blank pages challenged me as much as the cleared building site. If I could commit mortar, rock, and log to the land, then I could do the same with ink to paper. What follows are the Chronicles of Tom; the saga of a homesteading couple whose lives were forever changed by those times. Every house we've ever lived in since has borne the indelible stamp of Old Tom and of a place called Hogwild.