Versions of "Natural Man" in Appalachia ROBERT J. HIGGS In the Appalachian region we claim that we want to preserve a knowledge of the natural person living close to the soil, and hardly a day goes by that we do not hear, understandably, a lament for the passing of a simpler way of life. But what is it we are lamenting and exactly who is this natural person that we wish to remember as we move toward the twenty- first century and more and more artificiality? I submit that the natural per- son we profess to admire is a many-sided individual with complex and contradictory antecedents. I base this opinion on the conflicting types of the mountaineer in literature and on the diverse images surrounding the national heroes of the region. I am also proceeding on the assumption that literary art, being a distillative process, invariably reflects the Zeitgeist of a society, as do the legends surrounding epic heroes. My thesis, then, is that a study of the literature and heroic myths of Appalachia reveals at least three versions of "natural men" who constitute the central paradox in the collective Appalachian personality and who contribute to the confusion of cultural identity; these are (1) natural man as inherently bad as proclaimed by Thomas Hobbes, (2) natural man as innately good as argued by Jean Jacques Rousseau, and (3) the natural aristocrat as described by Thomas Jefferson and epitomized by Henry David Thoreau. The Appalachian per- sonality, being a composite one, cannot be understood until the com- ponents are evaluated. Understanding, perhaps, will lead to the cultivation of the best that is in it. One familiar use of the term natural is in I Corinthians 2.14: "But the natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: Neither can he know them, for they are spiritually discerned." Basically the same distinction was made by Thomas Hobbes, who contrasted the condition of "mere nature" in which everyone is at war with everyone else and the law of nature, lex naturalis, which he equated with the law of God.> To Hobbes (1588-1679), the great defender of royal prerogative, the artificial was much preferable to the natural: "For by art is created the great Leviathan called a Commonwealth, or State, in Latin Civitas, which is but an artificial man; though of greater stature and strength than the natural, for whose protection and defense it was in- tended..." (p. 129). The same rationale was used as one justification for the colonization of America. Says John Smith in 1616 in "A Call to the New 159 AN APPALACHIAN SYMPOSIUM World," "Religion...should move us...to show our faith by our works in converting those poor savages to the knowledge of God...." Another name for these poor savages was the naturals."2 " " " With the beginning of the romantic movement in the eighteenth century those living outside the Leviathan began to be seen in a favorable light, especially by Jean Jacques Rousseau (1712-1788), whose prescription was simple: return to nature, shun society, enjoy solitude. "Rousseau's Nature was not Newton's Nature—a system of matter and motion, ordered by Providence, and established in the human mind by nice mathematical calculations."3 Neither was Rousseau's Nature Hobbes' Nature: "But above all things let us beware concluding with Hobbes, that Man, as having no Idea of Goodness, must be naturally bad; that he is vicious because he does not know what Virtue is; that he always refuses to do any Service to those of his own Species, because he believes that none is due to them....This author [Rousseau] to argue from his [Hobbes'] own Prin- ciples, should say that the State of Nature, being that where the Care of our own Preservation interferes least with the Preservation of others, was of course the most favourable to Peace and most suitable to Mankind."4, , A third type of natural man is the natural aristocrat. In a letter to John Adams (Oct. 25, 1813) Thomas Jefferson distinguished between the ar- tificial aristocrat (or pseudo-aristoi) and the natural aristocracy and con- cluded that in a democracy the election of the natural aristocrat is essen- tial. The word aristoi means best, and the best government would be one based on virtue and talent and not on wealth and birth. Jefferson's tribute to external nature and his defense of freedom link him with Rousseau while his distrust of human nature, as reflected in his insistence upon checks and balances in government, is reminiscent of the thought of Hob- bes. Jefferson's synthesis of culture and nature is a highly refined and sophisticated philosophy, and while its impact upon America and Ap- palachia is immeasurable, there is another great American and natural aristocrat who today has more relevance to Appalachia than the immortal Jefferson, though Jefferson was closer to us geographically and a traveler in the mountains. I speak of Henry David Thoreau who merely traveled "a lot in Concord." While we should never turn our eyes away from the author of the Declaration of Independence, we should remember that his views come down to us from a position of privilege. Symbolically there is a vast difference between Monticello and Thoreau's cabin at Walden, and of the two men, Thoreau is more our contemporary. The three types of natural persons are quite evident in the literature of the frontier and of Southern Appalachia. The Hobbesian idea that man living in a state of nature is depraved has been echoed through the years by observers from William Byrd to Arnold Toynbee, who regarded the Ap- Robert J. Higgs 160 palachian as the modern "white barbarian," and one message is con- tinually implied: alienation from some royal or federal Leviathan leads to degradation. Hobbes, thus, is continually avenged. The belief in the natural depravity of man, however, has been quite at home in Southern Appalachia, and reminders of this condition by out- siders have not really been necessary. Sut Lovingood, a native East Ten- nessean, says he "ain't got no soul" and neither, apparently, has anyone else in Sut's opinion: "Whar thar ain't enuf feed, big childer roots little childer outen the troff, an' gobbils up thar part. Jis' so the yeath over: bishops eats elders, elders eats common peopil, they eats sich cattil es me, I eats possums, possums eats chickins, chickins swallers wums, an' wums am content to eat dus an the dus am the aind ove hit all."5 , ' As "a nat'ral born durn'd fool" Sut perhaps confirms the psalmist's statement, "The fool has said in his heart, There is no God" (14.1), but at the same time he raises the question who is the bigger fool—Sut, who acknowledges his con- dition, or those of us who refuse to recognize our own predatory ways and pretensions? Thus one interpretation of the Sut Lovingood Yarns (1867) is the Christian notion of the world, not as "spacecraft earth" as ecologists like to call our planet, but as a ship of fools, a notion deeply embedded in the Appalachian character and one, on the basis of all evidence, difficult indeed to refute. Through this mountaineer's eyes we see the asininity of the acquisitive culture of his day and of our own, and we also note the Calvinistic belief in the innate depravity of man, what Sut calls "univarsal onregenerit, human nater," which persists in the literature of the Ap- palachian region as seen in Flannery O'Connor's Wise Blood, James Dickey's Deliverance, and Cormac McCarthy's Child of God, to name only a few. While the romance mode may represent some of the best writing on Southern Appalachia, it also perpetuates the myth of the mountaineer as fundamentalist freak, sexual pervert, and necrophiliac—in short, a flawed creature, so flawed that he sometimes begins to appear as the exception rather than the rule, even when the author, Flannery O'Connor, for in- stance, states otherwise. Side by side with the natural man with the mark of the beast has been the child of Rousseau. This natural man is at home in the mountains and has little or no regard for the niceties of lowland society. According to David Hunter Strother ("Porte Crayon") writing in 1872, the mountaineer is born and nurtured in poverty and seclusion. He has no set pattern to grow up by, with none of the slop-shops of civilization at hand to furnish him ready-made clothing, manners, or opinions.... Simple but strong, uncouth but sincere, the man of the mountains knows nothing of the luxury and refinement of cities, and is equally protected from most of their attendant vices and miseries....Without rivalry, he knows little either of envy or ambition; with nothing, he is rich in the independence arising from few and simple wants.6 161 AN APPALACHIAN SYMPOSIUM Similar Rousseauistic sentiments can be found in the writings of John Esten Cooke, Philip Pendleton Cooke, and Sidney Lanier, who in Tiger Lilies (1867) created the Smallin brothers, one bad and the other good. Gorm is traitorous, treacherous, and vengeful while Cain is "good-natured," "com- municative," and the model of rectitude and honor. Thus, the good natural man is an appealing figure of self-reliance and intui t ive good sense—a sort of eternal innocent who shows no need of being saved by church, state, or formal education. He achieves demi-god status as Bulkington in Moby Dick and as Thomas Wolfe's endearing Nebraska Crane of The Web and the Rock and You Can't Go Home Again. Basically the same attributes that go to make up this natural man also form the character of the natural woman who in novel after novel of Appalachian life emerges as a pillar of strength, for example, Ivy Ingoldsby in This Day and Time, Mother in James Still's River of Earth, and the tragic Gertie Nevels in The Dollmaker. The third type of natural person, the natural aristocrat in the manner of Thoreau, has not figured as prominently in the fiction of Appalachia as the other two. To be sure the men and women mentioned above are natural aristocrats of a sort. Like Thoreau they derive strength from the earth, but unlike Thoreau they do not have "other lives to lead." Like Faulkner's Dilsey they endure or when removed too far from the earth, like Antaeus, lose their strength.The novel that best depicts the aristocracy that I have in mind is Wilma Dykeman's The Far Family in which Ivy Thurston marries Henry Hudson Courtland, an admirer and follower of Thoreau. When he mentions to Ivy the magic name, she responds: "Walden?" "It's a pond where a man named Thoreau lived for a while and wrote a book—" "Yes, I've seen that book at Uncle Fayte McQueen's." He appeared surprised and pleased. "How little I know about you and your family." He paused You read Walden and you'll know why I came to your mountains."7. " It is interesting to note in this dialogue that while Ivy has seen Walden at her uncle's place, she has not read it. She has not had to, a fact that Thoreau would appreciate, but when Courtland sends her a copy, she does read it. His inscription confirms the idea that the Thurstons did not need the book, while he himself did: "To the Thurstons, who know how to suck the very marrow-bone of life. With a stranger's sincere regards, Henry Hudson Courtland" (p. 256). To understand this union between Appalachia and New England, so to speak, one has to look more closely at Thoreau him- self. His disenchantment with the culture of America is memorably recor- ded, and his remark that Harvard "teaches all of the branches of knowledge but none of the roots" illustrates his criticism of education in his time and our own. But we err if we forget that Thoreau was a Harvard graduate, that he was a classicist as well as a naturalist, and that Walden Robert J. Higgs 162 contains a prescription for the social ills of his time. In other words, Thoreau was not critical of civil ization on principle as Rousseau seemed to be,8 but lamented the quality of the civil ization that surrounded him. His statement that "I love the wild no less than the good" does of course illustrate his attraction to the wilderness, but not any more so than his desire for the good. Thus, the marriage of Ivy and Courtland symbolizes the uni ty of energy and form. It is an aff irmation, a hope, and the product of that liaison is Phil, a name which means, appropriately, "love of," in this case love of life. It is refreshing that the spirit of Thoreau has emerged in a number of other works set in or near the Appalachian area, notably Wendell Berry's The Long-Legged House and Annie Dillard's The Pilgrim at Tinker Creek, and clearly in the thought of Jonathan Will iams, the Asheville-born poet, who has broadened the definition of the sense of place in a manner that would meet the approval of Henry David Thoreau: "It is what we are talking about when we speak of a person with ground- sense. One who is particular and specific and truly cultivated—but not parochial and regionalistic."9 The paradoxes in the Appalachian personality become more un- derstandable when the heroes of the area are examined in terms of the myths of the natural person. In every case there are at least two versions which center around the familiar battle between solitude and society, flight and reform, or Rousseau and Hobbes. Says Henry Nash Smith: The noted Western Baptist minister and gazetteer, John M. Peck, prepared a life of Boone...in 1847 which repeatedly attacked the current conception of the hero as a fugitive from civil ization. Peck says that Boone left North Carolina for the Kentucky wilderness because of the effeminacy and profligacy of wealthy slave owners who scorned the in- dustrious husbandman working his own fields. But by the time the biographer interviewed the aged hero in Missouri in 1818, Boone had become aware of an imposing historical mission. Although he had not consciously aimed to lay the foundations of a state or nation, he believed that he had been "a creature of Providence, ordained by Heaven as a pioneer in the wilderness to advance the civilization and the extension of his country."10 , If Boone was the harbinger of civilization, what type of civilization was it that followed him? The picture is confused to say the least, and while the opinion of Lewis Mumford may be unfair, it is certainly worth noting: The truth is that the life of the pioneer was bare and insufficient; he did not really face Nature, he merely evaded society....The return to Nature led, ironically, to a denatured en- vironment, and when after the long journey was over, the pioneer became conscious once more of a social obligation, these interests manifested themselves in covert pathological ways, like campaigns to prohibit the cigarette or to prescribe the length of sheets for hotel beds, or to promote institutions of compulsory good fellowship. So much for an ex- perience that failed either to absorb an old culture of create a new one! (pp. 38-39) Thus in Mumford's view the flight a la Rousseau was a failure as was the effort to form an artificial state of distinction. The score, one infers from 163 AN APPALACHIAN SYMPOSIUM Mumford's estimate, Hobbes O Rousseau O. To whom then should we turn as a social guide? One answer, according to Mumford, is Henry David Thoreau who went to the woods not to live alone but to live simply and who came into the world not to reform it but to live in it. "Thoreau," says Mumford, "knew that the wilderness was not a permanent home for man: one might go there for fortification, for a quickening of the senses,...one returned to Nature in order to become, in a deeper sense, more cultivated and civilized, not in order to return to crudities that men had already discarded" (p. 57). The "suggestions of Thoreau," Mumford adds, "which were to be embodied only after two generations in our national and State Parks, and in projects like Mr. Benton Mackaye's great conception of the Appalachian trail, make the comments of those who see in him only an arch-individualist, half Diogenes, half Rousseau, seem a little beside the point" (p. 58). If there is confusion concerning the identity of Boone in terms of the natural man, the problem becomes even more compounded when we look at "the king of the wild frontier," Davy Crockett. There are, argues Walter Blair, six Davy Crocketts, at least four of whom center on, in addition to his running battle with Jackson, horse sense and gumption. Depending on the image that pro or anti-Jackson supporters at different times wanted to convey, Crockett was pictured as both bad and good, as clownish, ram- bunctious, rascally, and vicious, and as dignified, gentlemanly, naturally intelligent and wise.11, The myths surrounding the conflict between nature and civilization lended support to all the versions. Having noted some persistent images in fiction and the confusion of the identity of two of the great heroes of the region, what can we say about ourselves today in regard to the myths of the natural person? This is a for- midable question, but let me attempt an answer by considering two im- portant forces upon the Appalachian personality, Christian fun- damentalism, an old force, and modern technology, a new one. There is evidence to support Richard Hofstadter's assertion that the fundamentalist view "is essentially Manichean; it looks upon the world as an arena for conflict between absolute good and absolute evil and ac- cordingly it scorns compromises...and can tolerate no ambiguities."12 The fundamentalist view is also Hobbesian and contrasts sharply with the af- firmative secular vision of the natural aristocracy, especially on the matter of original sin, the first basic assumption of fundamentalism. Jefferson's high hopes, memorably challenged in Robert Penn Warren's Brother to Dragons, are well known; and Thoreau was the very soul of optimism. Said he, "Though we are on our all fours, let us get up and walk like men." Thoreau's statement may be anti-Calvinist and non-Manichean, but I have always failed to see how it can be regarded as un-Christian except in some Robert J. Higgs 164 dogmatic sense. That there are things to love in this world, among them nature and the simple life, is the good news that Thoreau has to share, good news that is not antithetical to the Christian gospel of love. Some Christians, of course, would argue that the sin of Thoreau is one of pride, that he relied too much upon self rather than on God, and that, in effect, he was blasphemous to the end. Near his death, an abolitionist friend made some reference to a future life and Thoreau responded, "One world at a time." Then when a pious relative asked if he had made his peace with God his reply was: I am not aware that we ever quarreled."13, " Eschatological considerations aside, there is no doubting that Thoreau's philosophy for living in this world is entirely positive and quite consistent with the traditional mountain virtues of individualism, self-reliance, and pride, though quite at odds with doctrines of reform. His last words speak volumes in this regard. "Moose," he murmured, and "Indians." Implied herein is an attitude of wonder and respect toward the first "naturals," an attitude exactly opposite to that more prevalent attitude which led to their removal or to sterile assimilation. Another consequence of the fundamental heritage has been anti- intellectualism which throughout America has been fed by many streams. Lest we regard anti-intellectualism in a completely pejorative way, however, we must define the term, to distinguish between intelligence and intellect. According to Hofstadter, Intelligence works within the framework of limited but clearly stated goals, and may be quick to shear away questions of thought that do not seem to help in reaching them....In- tellect, on the other hand, is the critical, creative, and contemplative side of mind. Whereas intelligence seeks to grasp, manipulate, re-order, adjust, intellect examines, pon- ders, theorizes, criticizes, imagines. Intelligence wil l seize the immediate meaning in a situation and evaluate it. Intellect evaluates evaluations, and looks for meanings of situations as a whole (p. 25). Though I would find it impossible to prove, I believe that the Appalachian personality, generally speaking, has been characterized by intelligence rather than by intellect, an intelligence that has won, for example, the ad- miration of the world in Appalachian arts and crafts. It is an intelligence synonymous with common sense, or "horse sense," and has manifested it- self in a religion relatively devoid of ambiguities in the minds of believers. Today, however, one wonders if it is not time to reassess the importance of intellect vis-a-vis intelligence, especially when we consider the. bewildering impact of technology upon the old order. What is technology? As Robert Pirsig points out, "a root word of technology, technikos, originally meant art'."14 ' In a sense, then, a technologist like other artists envisions other worlds and other possibilities, but unlike them sets out to reify his vision. As technologists we are constantly rearranging nature, and 165 AN APPALACHIAN SYMPOSIUM practically all societies are to one degree or another technological. The pioneers, in fact, were primitive technologists. With ax and gun they set out to conquer the continent, reforming nature (and the Indian) and escaping an oppressive order in Europe and the Atlantic seaboard that demanded some sort of social or political conformity. The moral question, we now realize, has never really centered on the use of technology but the degree and the kind. To determine this degree and kind we need intellect as never before. Nothing could presage with more certainty the deterioration of the quality of life than the transference of a blind faith in providence to a blind faith in material progress. The Appalachian per- sonality has exhibited from time to time both misoneism (hatred of the new) and neophilia (love of the new). Neither will work; in the future we must not necessarily guard the old nor embrace the new but seek the best. To do so will require a society that is not only intelligent but intellectual as well. By way of conclusion of my discussion of the natural man in Ap- palachia I would like to cite the three formulae advanced by Otto Rank: These correspond to three different ages, world views, and human types. The first is the Apollonian, know thyself; the second the Dionysian, be thyself; the third, the Kantian, deter- mine thyself from thyself. The first rests on likeness to others and leads in the sense of Greek mentality to the acceptance of the universal ideal....know thyself, in order to im- prove thyself (in the terms of universal norms). It is therefore, not knowledge for the sake of the self, but knowledge for the goal of adaptation. The second principle (the Dionysian) in contrast to the first, repudiates likeness and the improvement based on it, as it demands the acceptance of what one is anyway....The true self, if it is unchained in Dionysian fashion, is not only antisocial but also unethical, and therefore the human being goes to pieces on it....Here comes in the Kantian determine thyself from thyself in the sense of a true self-knowledge and simultaneously the actual self-creation as the first constructive placing of the problem.15 If these three modes are applied to a chart reflecting the spectrum of per- sonality types in terms of the natural man, the correlations are im- mediately obvious and advocacy of the natural aristocrat inevitable (See Fig. 1). As much as the natural aristocrats differ from each other they all share a common belief in the necessity of a quality union of mind and nature as exemplified in their writings and lives. Thus what Rank calls the Kantian mode is the synthesis of head and heart, doing and being, duty and impulse, Apollonian and Dionysian, and the way to freedom, since extremes of liberty and conformity both corrupt. Either the indulgence of the unexamined self or the uncritical acceptance of external modes and styles can lead to nothing but the most deleterious effects for the Appalachian personality. Our choice, it seems to me, is un- mistakable, the cultivation of a natural aristocracy, the determination of the best in ourselves from ourselves. The determination of what is best Robert J. Higgs 166 almost certainly requires a new reverence for intellect which may be no guarantee for character or personal salvation but which must now be regarded as a prerequisite for a future society possessing any semblance of sanity. The Appalachian personality, like Walt Whitman, "contains multitudes," and among the throng are three types of natural men. May the best of these long prevail. Fig. 1 DIONYSIAN KANTIAN APOLLONIAN Naturalness Natural Aristocracy Artificialness S. Lovingood P. Henry Wm. Byrd D. Crockett Jefferson Champ Effingham** R.H. Lee* Emerson Thoreau Whitman Lincoln *For a fascinating discussion of the natural aristocracy in terms of Henry, Jefferson, and Lee, see William R. Taylor, Cavalier and Yankee (Garden City, New York: Anchor Books, 1963), especially Chapter II, "From Natural Aristocrat to Country Squire." **For a description of Champ Effingham, see John Esten Cooke, The Virginia Comedians (1854; rpt. Ridgewood, New Jersey: The Gregg Press, 1968), 17-18. NOTES * Leviathan, The English Philosophers from Bacon to Hill, ed. Edwin A. Burn (New York: Modern Library, 1939), 163, 222. Subsequent references are to this edition. 2Standard advice of the Virginia Company was: "In all your passages you must have great care not to offend the naturals if you can eschew it." D'Arcy McNickle, The Indian Tribes of the United States (New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1966), 14. 3Lewis Mumford, The Golden Day (New York: Dover Publications, 1957), 22. Subsequent references are to this edition. ^Inequality Among Mankind (1761; rpt. New York: Lenox Hill , 1971), 68-9. 5George Washington Harris, Sut Lovingood Yarns, ed. M. Thomas Inge (New Haven: College and University Press, 1966), 174-5. 6 "The Mountains," Harper's New Monthly Magazine, 44 (May 1872), 802. 7 The Far Family (New York: Avon Books, 1966), 252. Subsequent references are to this edition. 8In discussing their relationships with nature L. Gary Lambert concludes that "when con- trasted with Thoreau's...Jean Jacques' involvement in, and affection for, the natural world were indeed only ordinary." "Rousseau and Thoreau: Their Concept of Nature," Dissertation Abstracts, 30 (1969), 1988 A (Rice University). 167 AN APPALACHIAN SYMPOSIUM 9 "Thank God They Cannot Cut Down the Clouds," Laurel Leaves, 3 (April 1975), 18. !0Henry Nash Smith, Virgin Land: The American West as Symbol and Myth (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1950), 60-1. ""Six Davy Crocketts," The Southwest Review, 25 (1940), 443-62. 2 * Anti-Intellectualism in American Life (New York: Vintage Books, 1963), 135. Subsequent references are to this edition. 13Joseph Wood Krutch, Introduction, Walden and Other Writings (New York: Bantam Books, 1962), 19. l4Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance: An Inquiry into Values (New York: Will iam Morrow, 1974), 289-90. l5The Myth of the Birth of the Hero and Other Writings (New York: Random House, 1964), 293-4. Robert J. Higgs 168