1 Toward no earthly pole: Otherworldly quests for a Northwest Passage John Barrow’s Arctic explorer We can trace much of the magical vocabulary attached to polar explor- ation, at least in Anglophone cultures, back to the modern era of the search for a Northwest Passage in British naval history (1818– 59). For centuries before this a diverse set of monarchs, traders, naturalists and explorers yearned for a navigable maritime passage through the Arctic and into the Pacific Ocean, a route imagined as a short- cut to Asian markets that would benefit Britain commercially and politically. This dream of an Arctic passage became interlaced with English imperial visions of naval dominance in the north Atlantic during the heyday of Martin Frobisher and the magus Dr John Dee in the late sixteenth century (see Trattner, 1964) (see Figure 1.1). The disappearance and search for Franklin’s expedition of 1845 stands out as the most famous and politically useful story in this long quest for a Northwest Passage, inspiring the detailed mapping of the Arctic in its wake as well as a legacy of sovereignty claims by Canada. Yet this expedition only came about after centuries of inter- mittent state, commercial and scientific interest in Arctic discovery or, as Craciun puts it, ‘an uneven series of exploration booms punctuated by decades of inactivity and the occasional catastrophe’ (2016, 15). In this chapter I examine the way that the quest for a Northwest Passage was originally launched and narrated. I then turn to some of the otherworldly dreams associated with the quest – ‘otherworldly’ because they came about through embodied practices of transcendence, such as wandering, reverie, dreaming and remote sensing. After this I critique the influential myths associated with the body of the explorer – myths 19 Figure 1.1 Untitled Map of Arctic and Northwest Passage (1578) by George Best and James Beare. Source: Osher Collection, www. oshermaps.org/m ap/3 09. that underwrote the quest in the nineteenth century – before looking at the themes of place, the spectral and mobility in thinking about Arctic exploration. * * * For most of the eighteenth century the Hudson’s Bay Company, a fur- trading corporation which had been granted the vast and inhabited North American territories known as ‘Rupert’s Land’ by King Charles II in 1670, discouraged voyages in search of a maritime passage to the Pacific as it sought to protect its monopolies and territorial interests. When it did explore northwards and westwards of its trading posts along Hudson Bay, the Company generally sent small groups with limited, mostly commer- cial, aims. This caused ex- HBC employees, as well as armchair explorers like the Irish politician Arthur Dobbs, to agitate for larger government- funded geographical expeditions farther north (see Williams, 2002).1 Things began to change later in the century when overland explorers started to map the lands up to the Arctic and Pacific coasts and the region took on a new significance in British strategic and scientific thinking. 20 the SpeCtraL arCtiC The figure of the British Arctic explorer we are familiar with today emerged soon after the Napoleonic Wars ended in 1815. This Arctic explorer was a new figure associated not with the Hudson’s Bay Company (HBC), but with the perquisites of naval authority, mostly created out of the imagination of the influential civil servant John Barrow, Second Secretary of the Admiralty (1764– 1848) (Craciun, 2011; Cavell, 2008, 53– 70). From London, Barrow used his influence on the Admiralty Board to oversee a series of attempts at a Northwest Passage between 1818 and 1845, launching the careers of explorers such as John Franklin, George Back, James Clark Ross and William Edward Parry (see Fleming, 1998). Aside from appointments and direction, Barrow’s authority on Arctic exploration was exerted through his influential writings (see Cameron, 2007). Barrow was a prodigious contributor of global explor- ation and travel narratives in the Quarterly Review, an influential conser- vative journal, and his privileged political position meant that he literally fashioned an historical account of the quest for the Northwest Passage, portraying it as something ‘liberal and disinterested’ but also as ‘an object peculiarly British’ (1818, 378, 364). Barrow always had to contend with alternative and critical voices and part of his strategy in creating this quest was to tune out these voices in order to choreograph a consistent and legible history of British enterprise in a new national space. This was a space that was separate from the commercial (and less glorious) spaces of the whalers and fur traders – rather a northern stage that connected the navigators of the sixteenth century – whom Barrow found so cour- ageous – with the new breed of nineteenth- century heroic naval officers. Barrow’s historical survey of previous Arctic voyages, A Chronological History of Voyages into the Arctic Regions (1818), began the modern pro- gramme to chart a Northwest Passage. This book was published just a few months after two expeditions departed London on voyages of nor- thern discovery: one, under the command of John Ross, went in search of a Northwest Passage via Baffin Bay and the other, under the command of David Buchan, went in search of the North Pole by way of Spitsbergen. The specific context of these expeditions was information received from whalers, especially the Whitby scientist-w haler William Scoresby, which suggested a dramatic decline in seasonal sea ice (Barrow, 1818). The moribund eighteenth-c entury parliamentary reward scheme for geo- graphical achievements in the Arctic was rebooted and, with the enthu- siastic support of scientists like Joseph Banks and the Royal Society, Barrow was able to launch the quest.2 In A Chronological History Barrow framed these expeditions as the latest efforts in an imagined linear narrative of ‘dangers and toward no earthLy poLe 21 difficulties and progressive discoveries’ (‘Preface’) from the accounts of English navigators like Martin Frobisher and Henry Hudson. With these antecedents, Barrow’s Arctic explorer emerged as a man challenged to continue an adventure while inscribing British power and its ideals of enterprise and knowledge on an ever- unfinished map of the circum- polar region. Where these ideals were not realised, Barrow criticised the explorer as if he were an aberration, someone who had failed to live up to national expectations. One candidate who retrospectively dropped Barrow’s baton was Thomas James, the leader of a Bristol merchant expedition whose account of overwintering in 1631 at the southern end of Hudson Bay was lambasted as ‘a book of “Lamentation and weeping and great mourning” ’ (Barrow, 1818, 250; for revisionist accounts of James’s expedition see MacLaren, 2013; James, 2014). Barrow was disturbed by James’s dark and melancholic descriptions of the Arctic winter as well as his belief that the Northwest Passage did not in all likelihood exist. Belief in the Northwest Passage was a prerequisite for Barrow, but scientific observation was another priority and it was to this end that Banks offered influential institutional support for the Northwest Passage campaign (Bravo, 1992). The study of terrestrial magnetism was a par- ticularly important scientific agenda for the Royal Society and this over- lapped with geographical expeditions to the Arctic, as can be seen from the experiments of George Fisher, Edward Sabine and John Franklin (see Levere, 1993; Lambert, 2010). In the context of the increased pro- fessionalisation of science in Barrow’s time, an explorer’s connections to scientific networks and his competent use of instruments like the dip circle were paramount. For instance, in A Chronological History Barrow criticised the narrative by the HBC trader and explorer Samuel Hearne, A Journey from Prince of Wales’s Fort in Hudson’s Bay to the Northern Ocean in the years 1769, 1770, 1771 and 1772 (1795). Hearne travelled with a band of Chipewyan Indians from Fort Prince of Wales (now Churchill) on the western shore of Hudson Bay to the Arctic Ocean between 1769 and 1772, but the narrative of this expedition is generally believed to have been sensationalised by a ghostwriter years after the events took place (MacLaren, 1991; Cameron, 2015). In addition to this, Hearne was criticised for the erroneous scientific observations he took which, for Barrow, disparaged his credibility as an Arctic authority (1818, 301– 3). By 1818, aside from the practical duties to extend maritime, mag- netic and cartographic knowledge, Barrow’s Arctic explorer would also function as a more compliant author than Hearne, having been trained 22 the SpeCtraL arCtiC in taking accurate observations using instruments recommended by the Royal Society and publishing his account in a more prescribed way.3 This creation of the Arctic explorer implied a repression of emo- tional and ecstatic states. Stephen Greenblatt has written that wonder is the ‘central figure in the initial European response to the New World, the decisive emotional and intellectual experience in the presence of radical difference’ (1991, 14). Although he drew on the early modern navigators for a myth of Britain’s northern, Arctic destiny, Barrow had no place for the kinds of descriptions of wonder and superstition narrated by figures like James. Although it was not stressed by Barrow in A Chronological History, wonder certainly featured in accounts of Northwest Passage voyages during the sixteenth century where it became a feature of Inuit-B ritish relations. Take Martin Frobisher’s expedition to Baffin Island in 1576, which established the first of the Northwest Passage ‘contact zones’ between the British and different regional groups of Inuit (Pratt, 1992, 4). It is significant that the expedition’s first thoughts about local Inuit were that they were ‘porposes or seales, or some kinde of strange fish’ (Collinson ed., 1867, 73). Another wonder recorded a year later was that of a large dead fish found on a small island which was thought to be a ‘sea Unicorne’ (Collinson ed., 1867, 134): spiders were placed by the sailors in the horn – a legendary test to see if it was genuine (Settle, 1577, 32). Strange disappearances were also a feature of Arctic exploration at this time. Memories were still fresh about Hugh Willoughby’s Northeast Passage expedition of 1553. This ended in disaster after Willoughby’s ships were separated from each other off the coast of Norway. It was not until the summer of 1554 that Russian fishermen came across a horrific cargo of frozen men in a Lapland bay. So when, after visits and exchanges between the English and the Inuit in 1576, five of Frobisher’s men ignored orders and ventured on to the land, probably seeking to trade more ‘tryfles’ for fur, the Arctic once again became a haunted place. These men did not return to their ship ‘and were never since hearde of to this daye againe’ as a contemporary noted (Collinson ed., 1867, 73). This disturbing incident poisoned relations between the two groups on Frobisher’s subsequent voyages to Baffin Island in 1577 and 1578. In an act of revenge, Frobisher kidnapped three people as hostages in 1577, all of whom died shortly after arriving in Bristol. One of them – ‘Calichoughe’ as he was known – became a medical wonder and he was the subject of an autopsy in Bristol by Dr Edward Dodding. Where Frobisher’s chroniclers wrote of the ‘Anthropophagi’ and ‘monstrous Islandes of yce’ in the Arctic (Settle, 1577, 55, 27), Dodding claimed that Calichoughe’s toward no earthLy poLe 23 appearance showed evidence of Anglium diceres metum [‘Anglophobia’], an ailment that, in a psycho-g eographical manner, contributed to his death (Collinson ed., 1867, 190). After this the female captive, Arnaq, was forced to attend his burial and watch the body ‘completely covered over with earth’ in order to demonstrate that the English did not practise cannibalism (Collinson ed., 1867, 191). Arctic and non-A rctic tribal cus- toms were here mutually strange and dangerous. Other examples of strange and wondrous Arctic experiences include Frobisher’s men stripping an old Inuk ‘whome divers of oure Saylers supposed to be eyther a Divell, or a Witche’ to see if she was cloven-h oofed (Settle, 1577, 35) while, in his account of Humphrey Gilbert’s disastrous voyage back from Newfoundland in 1583, Edward Hayes wrote of how he ‘[omitted] to recite frivolous reports by them in the frigate, of strange voices the same night, which scared some from the helm’ (1910, 298). Later, on his voyage in search of a Northeast Passage in 1608, Henry Hudson soberly reported that two of his men had seen a mermaid while east of Greenland (see F igure 1.2): From the navill upward her backe and breasts were like a womans, as they say they saw her, but her body as big as one of us. Her skin very white, and long haire hanging downe behind of colour blacke. In her going downe they saw her tayle, which was like the tayle of a porposse, and speckled like a macrell. Their names that saw her were Thomas Hilles and Robert Rayner (qtd. in Janvier, 1909, 21–2 ). Later in the seventeenth century Thomas James particularly played up the ancient idea of the far north as the realm of Satan (see Franklin, 2008; MacLaren, 1984a), while a German whaler named Christian Bulle reported seeing the Devil’s fleet several times, ready to collect the souls of northern voyagers. Also, while overwintering on Spitsbergen with six men, Bulle and his company set the table for eight, instead of seven, so that the Devil could dine with them (Hacquebord, 1991, 152). These characterisations of the Arctic as a place of wonder and s upernatural beings became more subtle as later narrators took on more scientific and objective ways of writing about exploration, but we do know that a base level of religious beliefs, superstitions and taboos continued to inform the everyday thought of whalers and seamen on discovery service, a profession that came with the risks of death, shipwreck or severe accident.4 John Ross may be considered unusual for mentioning his sailors’ ‘harmless fondness for omens’ (1819, 30) because, from at least the eighteenth century on, clergymen 24 the SpeCtraL arCtiC Figure 1.2 Mermaid sighted by Hudson’s crew at 75° 7’N. Source: Thomas A. Janvier. Henry Hudson: A Brief Statement of his Aims and Achievements. New York: Harper, 1909. desperately sought to combat superstitious beliefs among seamen by promoting ‘Christian Spirit and Behaviour’ and respect for the workings of Providence (Woodward, 1806, 36). Ross, however, was not adverse to writing about Arctic omens and even recorded a strange solar phenomenon which made the sun appear like a medal of the Order of the Bath: ‘If there was any one on board who imagined that this appearance was ominous of that, or any other knighthood, to any of us, the secret was kept ... though, by a very sin- gular coincidence, it has been accomplished on the very day that the correction of this sheet, in passing through the press, enables me to add its fulfilment [December 24, 1834]’ (1835, 222). Although we might smile at Ross’s very personal vision, there was sometimes a very thin line between a personal faith in Providence and the transformation of the Arctic seas into regions of divine manifestation. Take William Scoresby, an evangelical Christian and committed Sabbatarian who saw signs of God’s approval and disapproval in things like the number of whales captured, ice movements, near-e scapes and storms avoided or endured (see Scoresby, 1850a). Shipwrecks also lent themselves to toward no earthLy poLe 25 providential and supernatural interpretations, and popular accounts of disasters at sea disclosed national, class, gender and racial identities (Lincoln, 1997). By the nineteenth century, the records of expedition commanders were supposed to be sober narrations of events, rarely interrupted by references to the author’s body, emotions or passions (see Parry, 1826, 41). Partly, this was due to the fact that officers’ journals and diaries were no longer purely their own, as they were collected by the naval com- mander on returning home and given to the Admiralty Board and Colonial Office for a period of time.5 Scientific styles of discourse, including hydrographical, geographical and magnetical data, were privileged and if an officer wanted a promotion or subsequent employment it would be unwise, for instance, to include one’s true feelings about the commander or details of the men’s violence or sexual involvement with local women. Barrow therefore praised Parry’s Journal of a Voyage for the Discovery of a North-W est Passage (1821) for not including any ‘marvellous stories’ and for sticking to ‘a plain statement of facts and occurrences, and a detail of scientific observations, made with unimpeachable accuracy and recorded in the clearest and most simple and unaffected language’ (Barrow 1821, 177). Private correspondence – for example, John Ross’s extended letter on his Victory expedition to the Hydrographer of the Navy, Francis Beaufort – gives better insight into the personal feelings of explorers (see Holland and Savelle, 1987). For literate crew and officers, shipboard publications and satires also served to express the poetic and dreamlike details of life in the Arctic, details that could not necessarily make it into a published narrative after it had been edited back home (see F igure 1.3).6 In the rare cases when accounts containing sensational or dis- senting details were published, they tended to be by junior expeditioners seeking to make commercial gains in the literary market.7 Commanders or expedition journalists with the responsibility for writing the offi- cial narrative often looked to James Cook’s dispassionate and influ- ential second narrative as a model (see Cavell, 2008, 18; Percy, 1996; O’Sullivan, 2008, 27–3 5).8 Where conventions of travel writing were utilised, the contemporary artistic categories of the sublime and the pic- turesque offered explorers ways of depicting the Arctic and marketing it to readers (see Glickman, 1998). Overall, the important thing for establishing narrative authority for Barrow was to maintain a separ- ation between the subject and the world: even if the explorer became immersed in foreign spaces or societies, his body must always be shown to be under the control of his mind. 26 the SpeCtraL arCtiC Figure 1.3 ‘The Dream – Midnight – Middle Watch’, by George F. MacDougall. Source: Sherard Osborn and George F. MacDougall eds. Facsimile of the Illustrated Arctic News, etc. London: Ackermann, 1852. Otherworldly voices The log-b ooks and official accounts of naval expeditions were only two types of texts that came out of the searches for a Northwest Passage. We therefore need to look elsewhere to get a more rounded view of the way that the Arctic was imagined and experienced by people. Scholars in recent decades have argued that relying on the writings of explorers and their immediate readerships to understand Arctic exploration is unsound, both historically and methodologically. Challenging the dominance of a particularly constrictive type of historical narration of polar exploration – pioneered by Barrow – scholars have shown that people of all classes in nineteenth- century Britain and North America gained knowledge about the Arctic through visual culture (Potter, 2007), the newspaper and periodical presses (Cavell, 2008; David, 2000; Riffenburgh, 1994) and fiction (Wilson, 2003; Spufford, 1996; Hill, 2008; David, 2000). Things like panoramas, articles in local and national newspapers and assorted works of fiction were more likely to inform the average consumer about the Arctic than the expensive account of an explorer. A more neglected part of this extended narrative field includes the diverse voyages (poetic, magical and spiritual) taken across the Atlantic Ocean to ‘otherworldly’ polar environments. In the nineteenth century, toward no earthLy poLe 27 there was a lively scientific interest in ‘Hollow Earth’ hypotheses (see Standish, 2006; Spufford, 1996, 64–7 4) as well as popular interest in mystical theories of an ‘Open Polar Sea’ or a polar paradise (see Warren, 1898; Potter, 2004; Wilson, 2003). Frederick Cook’s My Attainment of the Pole (1911) is particularly noteworthy for its ecstatic descriptions of the polar otherworld. Cook was a self-c onsciously haunted explorer, enchanted by the ‘spectral denizens of the North’ and the ghosts of dead explorers that he believed accompanied him on his journey (212– 3). In many other cases, otherworldly voyages were more personal and intimate, involving family members back home sensing the presence of loved ones in the Arctic. For example, in his autobiography, the infamous Victorian medium Daniel Dunglas Home remembered seeing a vision of his brother die during a polar expedition in the 1850s, ‘at the very time of its occurrence’ (1864, 30). In a similar case, the wife of T.C. Pullen, who served as second-i n-c ommand of the Franklin searching vessel the North Star, dreamt the following: she was standing on the deck of her husband’s vessel, which was deserted. The ship was lit up by a thousand pieces of paper, which the lady, impelled by some impulse, picked up. On each she read these words: ‘From the log of H.M.S. North Star, September 30, 1852’. Mrs. Pullen kept this date in her memory, and on the next occasion a letter arrived from her husband she read that on that very date he had been saved from death (‘A Treasure House of Romance’, The Western Morning News and Mercury, 1925). There was a particular cluster of Arctic dreams associated with two dis- astrous American North Pole expeditions of the 1880s. In December 1881, just after the first news reached St. Petersburg of the tragic end of the American Jeannette North Pole expedition, the father of Lieutenant Charles W. Chipp, second-i n-c ommand of the ship, told the New York Times of a strange dream he had in June of that year. Chipp dreamt that the ship ‘was being crushed in the ice’: ‘He says the whole affair seemed perfectly vivid before his eyes at the time and he thought much about it since’ (‘Lieut. Chipp’s Father’s Dream’). The Jeannette was indeed crushed by the ice floes on 12 June 1881, hundreds of miles north of the Siberian mainland and Chipp died in the subsequent desperate boat journey towards the Lena delta. In 1882 the wife of the Jeannette’s engineer George W. Melville, who safely reached the Lena delta and then began a search for his lost 28 the SpeCtraL arCtiC comrades, told a reporter from the New York Times her own strange experience: ‘On the 10th of last June ... I retired to my room late at night. Days of anxious waiting for some news of the Jeannette without bringing a ray of hope had almost caused me to despair of ever again seeing my husband. I had fallen into an uneasy sleep, from which one of the children aroused me. It was, perhaps, more than an hour after this, and while I was wide awake, that I became conscious of a strange presence in the room, and you may well imagine with what mingled feelings of joy and fear I heard George’s voice and looking up, saw him standing by the bedside – saw him as plainly as I now see you. He was saying: ‘Count the bells! Count the bells!’ and as he spoke I distinctly heard the bell of a ship striking ... ‘Eight bells; the Jeannette is lost!’ and vanished from the room. At that moment the sitting-r oom clock struck the hour of 4 and it was the morning of the 11th of June. At that very hour on that very morning the Jeannette went down into the fathomless depths of the Arctic Ocean and the ice floe closed over her grave. I am no Spiritualist’, continued Mrs. Melville, ‘nor do I believe in spirits ... A few weeks after the occurrence which I have narrated, and at the same hour in the morning, I had arisen for the day, and was in the hall which you see there. Again I saw my husband – nay, I even felt his breath in my face. I was dreadfully startled, but had sufficient courage to call out: ‘George, is that you?’ when the figure disappeared as if swallowed up in the air’ (‘Melville’s Wife’s Story’). Just a few years later another American polar expedition – the Lady Franklin Bay Expedition, led by Adolphus Greely – also ended in death and disaster. This time the mother of an expedition member, Sergeant David Linn, had her son’s body examined ‘as to the manner of his death, she having dreamed that he was shot in the back’ (‘The Greely Expedition’). These visions and dreams show how non- explorers could appro- priate their own senses and ideas about the Arctic in the nineteenth century. This happened because of a gradual breakdown in cultural authority over the Arctic when diverse audiences, who initially bought into quest narratives like Barrow’s, started to interpret exploration differ- ently, ‘in accordance with their own needs and preoccupations’ (Cavell, 2008, 10). Once these Arctic channels had been opened up for popular cultures, stories of ghosts, dreams and strange coincidences started to appear in letters, texts and images. toward no earthLy poLe 29 It is a given that the narratives of naval explorers spread through popular culture and became central to the way that the Arctic was imagined in the nineteenth century. But alternative voices, sometimes dissenting, gothic or ghostly, were enmeshed in this geographical imagination. These include, for instance, the testimony of 50 psychics who supported Frederick Cook’s contested claim that he reached the North Pole region in 1908 (‘Spirits for Cook’). I follow previous scholars in looking at the way the Arctic was constructed by different audiences but I look at the dream- work that went into these imaginaries as well. This involves questioning the ontological separation between practice and representation, between the Arctic experiences of explorers and the images, panoramas and literature produced by audiences in Britain. This dream- work of Arctic exploration involved many experiences including reverie, mesmeric travelling and the projection of ghostly desires. Such spectral experiences and practices wove together the spaces of the Arctic and Britain. They could be fragmentary or substantive but, taken together, they challenge the idea of an objective and distant explorer. This has consequences for the way we think about the forms and legacies of Arctic exploration today. The heterogeneous journals, stories, art and fiction that emerged from this period in the history of the Arctic are still relevant. They inform the way that people engage with the issue of the Northwest Passage today, whether through academic scholarship, popular culture, or the exercise of sovereignty at a state level. Yet taking account of the diversity of voices involved in Arctic exploration requires that we move beyond an exclusive focus on representations to an engagement with the ‘non- representational’ also. Scholars of global exploration have highlighted the varieties of actors involved in the cultures of exploration but, when it comes to the ways western navigators and travellers thought about exotic and unmapped regions of land and sea, there has been a tendency to focus on the visual or representational – what they ‘saw’ over what they ‘experienced’ (see for example Smith, 1985; Stafford, 1999). This focus has undoubtedly brought out cogent themes in histories of imperial discovery (see Rose, 1993) but it has also resulted in a tendency to take bodies for granted. Members of Arctic expeditions were, after all, living, dreaming, breathing and embodied actors in the midst of strange environments inhabited by strangers who also lived and breathed the same air. Postcolonial analysis in particular has relied on the idea of the person as a spectator at the expense of the idea of a person who, despite forming representations of the environment ‘out there’, is part of a complex world 30 the SpeCtraL arCtiC that impacts on subjectivities (Dubow, 2000). This objectification of colonial space means there is a lack of interest in the emotions or altered states of consciousness among explorers, particularly Arctic explorers.9 Analysing representations of the Arctic as dreamlike or ghostly demands an attentiveness to the non-r epresentational, to both everyday practices and to the moments when the body seems to melt away or senses the otherworldly.10 This double movement, towards and beyond representation, leads me to point out two overarching myths that have underwritten traditional accounts of polar exploration by our British tribe: the integrity of the explorer’s body and its edification despite great physical pain. Both reflect the ur- myth that polar space tests the explorer on a moral plane. The explorer’s body A report from 1877, released after the return of yet another failed Admiralty expedition in search of the North Pole, gave Arctic explor- ation the appearance of a perfect ‘bloodless contest’ between Britain and other nations which elevated the mind in its ‘true and honest ambition’ (Johnston, 1877, 7). This understanding of Arctic experience as nation- alist, but also enlightened, created a particular set of associations around the body of the male explorer – a coherent, rational actor constituted as heroic by virtue of his clean and selfless activity in a dangerous and unknown region. At the outset of Barrow’s quest, William Scoresby had been clear that if a Northwest Passage was found at all it would be of no practical use due to the prevailing sea-i ce conditions that rarely allowed for more than two months of navigation. Yet Scoresby supported Northwest Passage expeditions for their advancement of scientific and geographic knowledge and for their development of the ‘adventurous spirit’ of British navigators (1820, I, 21– 2). Decades later, even after the enormous expense and tra- gedies associated with the lost Franklin expedition, the President of the Royal Geographical Society, Roderick Murchison, similarly praised the quest as ‘the best school for testing, by the severest trials, the skill and endurance of many a brave seaman. In her hour of need – should need arise – England knows that such men will nobly do their duty’ (qtd. in McClintock, 1859, xxii). Barrow’s construction of the Northwest Passage quest implied that, despite the tragedies and limitations of exploration, failure was something that could be reconfigured by explorers and the media into a kind of national capital – a repository of noble action. This toward no earthLy poLe 31 framework meant that many nineteenth- century narratives were, con- sciously and unconsciously, cast in a military rhetoric that appealed to national masculine values.11 While it is dangerous to assume that all journalists and naval authorities were enamoured of Arctic exploration (see Cavell, 2008), where commentators were positive about the benefits of northern expeditions a rather disembodied mythology of heroism predominated. Less well publicised were the bodily and ignoble incidents that lurked beneath the epic stories: these included Martin Frobisher receiving an Inuk arrow in his buttocks (Collinson ed., 1867, 131); bitter rows about smoking in a tent (Ross and Savelle, 1992, 181); the suggestion that John Ross should mend a state-o f-t he-a rt steam- boiler with ‘dung and potatoes’ (Braithwaite, 1849, 13); an expeditioner dying in the snow with his trousers down (Bray, 1992, 120); and a survivor of the Franklin expedition who was nicknamed Qoitoyok by his Inuit hosts [Inuktitut: ‘he who pisses a lot’] (Eber, 2008, 86). While on this note, it is important to remember that Arctic explorers were not at all immune to satire and derision (Spufford, 1996, 55– 7): John Ross’s 1818 expedition was particularly pilloried by sections of the press and he became the subject of the ribald book Munchausen at the Pole (1819) (see Potter, 2007, 48– 51). Even the great Arctic commander William Edward Parry – lionised by Barrow at every opportunity – was at the receiving end of criticism and satirical verse from the pens of Thomas Hood and Samuel Taylor Coleridge (see Cavell, 2013a, 60–1 , 64– 5). Panorama shows also offered audiences myth- busting moments of Arctic humour, especially if compèred by a talented showman capable of making fun of the audience’s assumptions of heroism (see ‘Moving (Dioramic) Experiences’, 305). The poetry of Alfred Tennyson is a touchstone in the more familiar mythology of polar heroism: indeed, Tennyson was John Franklin’s nephew and composed the epitaph for the Franklin monument at Westminster Abbey, unveiled in 1875: NOT HERE! THE WHITE NORTH HAS THY BONES; AND THOU HEROIC SAILOR-S OUL ART PASSING ON THINE HAPPIER VOYAGE NOW TOWARD NO EARTHLY POLE. In this piece, Tennyson looked back to the loss of Franklin’s last Arctic expedition with a sentimental vision of an environment transcended through heroic death. It is no coincidence, therefore, that a line from 32 the SpeCtraL arCtiC another Tennyson poem, ‘Ulysses’ (1842), was later used to commem- orate another polar disaster – the tragic end to Robert Falcon Scott’s Terra Nova Antarctic expedition.12 Before they left Antarctica, the sur- viving members of Scott’s expedition erected a memorial cross inscribed with Tennyson’s line ‘To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield’, a cit- ation deeply redolent of the British mythology of polar heroism. In this imagination, the struggles and will- power of the explorer are emphasised, sometimes at the expense of environmental knowledge or adaptation. Jen Hill (2008) shows how the myth of a blank, empty Arctic made sense as a figurative and literal testing ground for British mascu- linity and patriotism, one where the body and its characteristics were placed at risk. In his ‘Message to the Public’, Scott famously declined to write of the ‘hardihood, endurance and courage of my companions which would have stirred the heart of every Englishman. These rough notes and our dead bodies must tell the tale’ (1913, I, 417). In the discourses of polar heroism, the British body overcame the environment through a denial of, or victory over, pain and suffering. In defeat, death remained as an emblem of victory, a form of national possession or inscription and remembering the final moments of explorers was part of this resistance. Take, for instance, the following passage, which imagines the afterlife of Franklin: No green turf covers the grave of Franklin. The drifting snow and benumbing ice shroud his remains, and the howling Arctic blast for ever and ever represents his requiem, and spreads its wailing dirge over the desolation where the gallant seaman is laid to rest. His enterprise is over. Those elements against which he persevered with such daring constancy vanquished him at last; and he has only given an immortal name and interest to a spot which human foot can rarely tread, and human sympathies but faintly penetrate (Jerdan, 1866, 220). Such representations, and the myths they mask, continue to influence the way Arctic exploration is thought of to the present day. Franklin’s first Arctic land expedition along the Coppermine River (1819–22) is important here as a disaster that was transformed through narrative into an heroic journey. In his account of the expedition in Narrative of a Journey to the Shores of the Polar Sea (1823), Franklin created a narrative distance from the everyday bodily pain he and his men experienced by constructing an ‘ideological, mythic, national’ body toward no earthLy poLe 33 (Hill, 2008, 45). Franklin deployed this over-d etermined symbol in his dis- cussion of the killing of Michel Terohaute, an Iroquois voyageur member of the expedition who was suspected of murdering the Englishman Robert Hood and cannibalising his colleagues. Readers of these sensa- tional events could frame the British naval explorer as rational, civilised and reasonable, in contrast to the wild, irrational and unstable landscape and its indigenous inhabitants. As a later biographer of Franklin put it, this story was an ‘Iliad in prose’ and the incidents of chivalry, devo- tion and struggle that it related ‘are all tales which should be household words by every English fire-s ide’ (Osborn, 1860, 23–4 ). In the emergent myth of British polar exploration it was not just the conquering of space that was at stake, therefore, but the unfolding and testing of patriotic duty and spirituality in the face of disaster. At the time of Hood’s death, the expeditioners had eaten their moccasins and scraps of leather and were surviving on tripe de roche, a kind of edible moss scattered throughout the barren grounds of northern Canada. This suffering brought the British explorers and their Canadian voyageurs a shared sense of their fragility. The expedition’s naturalist, Dr John Richardson, almost drowned when crossing a river and had to be stripped and rolled in blankets. ‘I cannot describe’, Franklin wrote of this incident, ‘what every one felt at beholding the skeleton which the Doctor’s debilitated frame exhibited. When he stripped, the Canadians simultaneously exclaimed, “Ah que nous sommes maigres” ’ [‘ah how very thin we are’] (1823, 424). However, in comparison to the voyageurs, the bodies of the British were failing even more alarmingly: they were unable even to gather tripe de roche. The ultimate difference between the two groups, according to Franklin, was a moral one, for the British refused to give in to despair and instead relied on God. As an example of this, Franklin praised his subordinate seaman, John Hepburn, who, ‘animated by a firm reliance on the beneficence of the Supreme Being, tempered with resignation to his will, was indefatigable in his exertions to serve us’ (Franklin, 1823, 427). Richardson’s narrative of how he realised that Terohaute had killed, and probably cannibalised, three of the other voyageurs also contrasted British spiritual solace with the spir- itual poverty of the native. Richardson described how he and Hood gained ‘incalculable benefit’ from reading to each other from religious books (Franklin, 1823, 449). To make the differences even plainer, when Hood was shot by Terohaute he had been reading Bickersteth’s Scripture Help, while Terohaute’s principles, ‘unsupported by a belief in the divine truths of Christianity, were unable to withstand the 34 the SpeCtraL arCtiC pressure of severe distress’ (Franklin, 1823, 458– 9). For Barrow, this episode was useful in defining the noble characteristics of the British explorer in extremis: [O]u t of fifteen individuals enured from their birth to cold, fatigue, and hunger, no less than ten (native landsmen) [voyageurs] were so subdued by the aggravation of those evils to which they had been habituated, as to give themselves up to indifference, insub- ordination, and despair, and finally, to sink down and die; whilst of five British seamen, unaccustomed to the severity of the cli- mate, and the hardships attending to it, one only fell, and that one by the murderous hand of an assassin. A light buoyant heart, a confidence in their own powers, supported by a firm reliance on a merciful Providence, never once forsook them, nor suffered the approach of despondency, but brought them safely through such misery and distress as rarely, if ever, have been surmounted (1846, 332). Perseverance despite bodily pain is a theme that runs through Barrow’s summary of this classic age of British Arctic exploration, Voyages of Discovery and Research within the Arctic Regions, from the Year 1818 to the Present Time (1846). Here Barrow argued that what made men like Parry, Franklin, Back and James Clark Ross legitimate representatives of British endeavour was the moral energy to keep going without complaining, confident in the guidance of Providence. Ignoring the physical and psychological torment suffered by voyageurs and other indigenous guides, Barrow celebrated the commanders’ patient endurance of extreme suffering, borne without murmuring, and with an equanimity and fortitude of mind under the most appalling distress, rarely if ever equalled, and such as could only be supported by a superior degree of moral courage and resignation to the Divine will – of displaying virtues like these of no ordinary cast, and such as will not fail to excite the sympathy and challenge the admiration of every right- feeling reader (Barrow, 1846, vii). Polar exploration was an opportunity for British men to prove them- selves, to display the virtues that legitimated their global position. The definition of success and failure in the Arctic was therefore dependent on who was narrating stories of exploration, and what use they had among different popular or elite audiences. For some, John Ross’s expedition of toward no earthLy poLe 35 1818 was a notorious failure for having returned back to Britain after sighting the illusory ‘Croker Mountains’ that blocked Lancaster Sound, causing Ross to cast doubt on the existence of a Northwest Passage. The following year Parry, Barrow’s favourite, breezily sailed through this blockage, thereby making Ross appear a foolishly pessimistic navi- gator and a symbol of retreat in the Northwest Passage quest. Although Buchan’s expedition of 1818 also failed in its objectives, ‘unlike the other,’ Barrow wrote, ‘it was not owing to any want of exertion, zeal, or intelligence’ (1846, 62–3 ). George Lyon’s expedition of 1824 also failed in its objectives, but it similarly displayed ‘a fine example of manly reso- lution under the most distressing difficulties, and of pious resignation to the Divine will’ (Barrow, 1846, 230). For Barrow, Ross was unfit for discovery service because of his lack of perseverance, for ‘running away home’ after a journey that any yachtsman could have accomplished (Barrow, 1846, 49). By contrast, Parry possessed ‘the true character and spirit of a British sailor – open, straightforward, and upright’ (Barrow, 1846, 119): needless to say, Parry shared Barrow’s optimism about the Northwest Passage quest.13 Aside from disputes about mapping and discovery, then, there were different ‘cultural cartographies’ (Gieryn, 1999) of Arctic explor- ation at work. This meant that boundaries were policed and discipline was enforced precisely because definitions were so important. During his overwintering expedition of 1819–2 0, Parry was able to keep the bodies and minds of his men active through exercise and education, thereby displaying the kind of persevering and enterprising spirit that Barrow thought central to British maritime power. James Clark Ross, John Ross’s nephew, was another favourite of Barrow’s, who said he had ‘bodily powers of no ordinary kind’ and united ‘an ardent love of enterprise, a determined perseverance in the attainment of his object, and a mind undaunted by difficulty or danger’ (Barrow, 1846, 329– 30). Crucially, in Barrow’s system, scientific progress and perseverance were joined by the idea of Divine Providence: Parry described it as ‘the only rational source of true fortitude in man’ (1826, 183). For Barrow, religious faith performed the work of distancing (if not separating) the body from the painful realities of exploration and guided the mind toward the edifying powers of hope and spiritual assurance (see Elce, 2002a). What Barrow did not go into was the way that religious belief was not just something that Arctic explorers took with them, but was some- thing that emerged through practices in the field. There was a routine religiosity to exploration comprised of daily prayers, grace before meals and Sunday services. On Parry’s 1819–20 expedition, divine service was 36 the SpeCtraL arCtiC a systematic part of the daily regime of activities and Sunday service was a time for discipline and surveillance. ‘[R]e signation to the Divine will’ was thus the result of practices in which bodies came together and it was more contingent than Barrow would have realised. It was not a case of bodies becoming inured to the challenges of an Arctic winter through faith and discipline, but a case of living, breathing men becoming explorers every day, again and again, through the very processes that seemed habitual and orderly. Several expeditioners mentioned the importance of adapting prayers and sermons to Arctic situations, so that the men could use reli- gious discourse in their everyday lives (see Parry, 1821, 126; Osborn, 1852, 121). This was the result of the evangelical Anglicanism that spread through the Royal Navy during the Napoleonic Wars, mostly through the efforts of officers known as ‘Blue Lights’. These pious officers worked for moral renewal on warships by organising prayer meetings, literacy classes and religious discussions with men on the lower decks (see Blake, 2008). Although many officers in the Royal Navy distrusted the evangelicals by the end of the Wars, several low church and evangel- ical Christian officers quickly attained leadership roles in the Northwest Passage quest. Parry, Franklin and Richardson were ‘Blue Lights’ and for them the quest became an opportunity to integrate faith with exploration. Christianity, it was thought, could play a key role in managing the health and well-b eing of their men during the long and stressful Arctic winters (see Blake, 2014, 187– 211). Furthermore, in the absence of chaplains, it was usual for commanders to conduct prayer services on expedition and whaling ships in the Arctic. While explorers like Parry and Franklin were therefore responsible for the spiritual health of their men – maintained through public observance – they were also concerned with a deepening of their private faith while in the Arctic. Parry turned from conventional Anglicanism to evangelical Anglicanism while overwintering at Port Bowen in 1824–5 . During this period, he immersed himself in the New Testament and formed a close religious bond with his purser, William Harvey Hooper. He even managed to convert two seamen to his faith (Parry, 1858, 201). Also, as Cavell shows (2010), Franklin’s experience in the Arctic between 1819 and 1822, and his representation of it later, were influenced by his evan- gelical faith. In the aftermath of this expedition, Franklin wrote, ‘I have never experienced Such ... happiness from the comforts of religion as in the moments of greatest distress, when there scarcely appeared any reason to hope that my existence could be prolonged beyond a few days’ (qtd. in Cavell, 2008, 96). Bodies in the Arctic were also religious bodies toward no earthLy poLe 37 and although Christian rhetoric was used to buffer the body from harsh realities, in practice, faith was expressed and acquired in the body’s everyday performance and rhythms. Indeed, Parry was certain that the men ‘who were always called upon in a time of especial difficulty and danger, – were, without exception, those who had thought the most ser- iously on religious subjects’ [sic] (qtd. in Parry, 1858, 208).14 Faith was therefore very important to how suffering was both experienced pri- vately and represented to wider audiences. As Cavell notes: Without the image of the stoical Christian explorer-h ero who would, if necessary, die with a prayer on his lips and a religious book in his hand, it is unlikely that the long, frustrating search for the Northwest Passage could have caught the public’s attention and held it for so many decades (2010, 139). It is also important to note the connections between evangelicalism and colonialism in the Arctic: Franklin and other officers were supportive of early missionary attempts to convert the Inuit to Christianity (see Craciun, 2016, 104). The Arctic as a testing ground for ‘national bodies’ (Hill, 2008, 29– 52) was a myth that was transferable to other geographical quests, but it also had currency among non-B ritish explorers. Underwriting it were ways of thinking about polar environments that ranged from the idea of space as blank and awaiting discovery, to the idea of space as a treacherous agent that could resist discovery and swallowed up explorers. This latter sense of a struggle between the enlightened but fragile male and an alien, nonhuman nature, came up again during the race for the North Pole with Frederick Cook writing of: the terrible oppression of that raging, life- sucking vampire force sweeping over the desolate world. Disembodied things – the souls of those, perhaps, who had perished here – seemed frenziedly calling me in the wind. I felt under me the surge of the sweeping, awful sea. I felt the desolation of this stormy world within my shuddering soul; but, withal, I throbbed with a determination to assert the supremacy of living man over these blind, insensate forces; to prove that the living brain and palpitating muscle of a finite though con- scious creature could vanquish a hostile Nature which creates to kill. I burned to justify those who had died here; to fulfill by proxy their hopes; to set their calling souls at rest. The storm waked in me an angry, challenging determination (1911, 229). 38 the SpeCtraL arCtiC Innumerable examples from other polar narratives could be cited which reiterate this basic, and extremely problematic, separation between body and nature. It is on the basis of such understandings of polar exploration that the concept of discovery was internalised as a kind of self-d iscovery with little to do with the actualities of the worlds travelled through. Rather, exploration was imagined by many as something more than the sum of its parts – even as ecstatic experience. This partly came out of the Romantic interest in armchair travelling (see Stiegler, 2013) – the prac- tice of exploring by wandering around a room, going through material collections, or ruminating over memories. This is what Henry David Thoreau wrote about the loss of the Franklin expedition: Is not our own interior white on the chart? Is it ... a North-W est Passage around this continent, that we would find? ... Is Franklin the only man who is lost, that his wife should be so earnest to find him? ... Be rather the Mungo Park, the Lewis and Clarke and Frobisher, of your own streams and oceans; explore your own higher latitudes, – with shiploads of preserved meats to support you, if they be necessary; and pile the empty cans sky-h igh for a sign (1895, 343). One of the most striking invocations of the transcendental type of polar journey is the Latin inscription over the bust of Scott at the entrance to the Scott Polar Research Institute in Cambridge, England, which reads Quaesivit arcana poli, videt dei [‘he sought the secret of the pole, but saw God’]. Given the rhetoric of suffering and edification in polar narratives, references to ghosts and dreams could easily be taken to be mere poetic devices, appeals to divine-h uman relations that stood for a torturous worldly relationship with the body-i n-p ain. But to do so would be to ignore the actual role of space. In the traditional account of polar exploration as narrated by Barrow and others, the Arctic was merely a sublime backdrop, a stage upon which humans left their mark or were put to the test. Barrow, like, most popular commentary on polar exploration, continues to place an emphasis on mythic change through linear time, on heroic adventures in a depthless, unchanging and depoliticised space. Here, time conquers space, a fact shown in the progressive mapping of ‘empty’ space.15 The Arctic in these narratives is discussed in terms of discovering and naming. Thinking about Arctic space and place in a more dynamic and relational manner, by contrast, shows us the ways that explorers actually moved toward no earthLy poLe 39 through an environment that was haunted: by inhabitants, spirits and sensed presences. Making Arctic place British explorers in the Arctic, particularly those who produced and circulated knowledge, were bound by fundamental somatic and envir- onmental conditions. These conditions influenced the way they behaved, they way they moved and they way they thought. A question frequently asked of someone researching polar history is ‘Have you been there?’ The implication is that physical presence in the Arctic or Antarctic – however these locations are defined – provides access to knowledge and feelings that libraries and archives do not offer, but must form part of any ana- lysis. But how is place really being made here and by whom? The explorer’s body, located at the centre of knowledge production, something that so impresses people who imagine the polar regions to be inaccessible, is also a dreaming body: ‘I work, read, think, and dream’ wrote Nansen of his Arctic routine onboard the Fram (1897, I, 260); else- where he quoted Edvard Grieg in describing the environment: ‘[T] hat is where the reality became a dream, and the dream became reality!’ (Nansen, 1897, 202). Nansen put his finger on precisely the kind of perception I am interested in – a dreamlike perception that was tied up with people’s Arctic encounters. Comments such as this suggest that in experiences like polar dreaming or armchair travelling to the Arctic from Britain, people’s travel involved bodily movements and the sensing of otherworlds beyond the body. In western imaginations the Arctic was something constructed over time, an assembly of myths and testimonies that marked out the region as exotic. For Europeans, biblical ideas of the North as the domain of Satan were succeeded by the medieval ideas of Ultima Thule and early modern visions of gold or quick access to the Indies (Franklin, 2008). By the era of the Northwest Passage quest, the attribution of a type of non- human agency to the Arctic regions was common in British culture. The strangeness of the light, the flashes of the Aurora Borealis and, above all, the phantasmagoric ice contributed to the idea of the north as a realm of fantastic spectacles. Just as there came to be a way that Africa or the African ‘should look’ (Neumann, 1998, 1), popular representations of the Arctic tended to cluster around the idea of a sublime wilderness.16 Although describing a voyage to the Antarctic regions, Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s The Rime of the Ancient Mariner (1798) was in part 40 the SpeCtraL arCtiC inspired by Arctic sources and therefore reproduces many of the stereo- typical and aesthetic features of the icescape: Listen, Stranger! Storm and Wind, A Wind and Tempest strong! For days and weeks it play’d us freaks – Like Chaff we drove along. Listen, Stranger! Mist and Snow, And it grew wond’rous cauld: And Ice mast-h igh came floating by As green as Emerauld. And thro’ the drifts the snowy clifts Did send a dismal sheen; Ne shapes of men ne beasts we ken – The Ice was all between. The Ice was here, the Ice was there, The Ice was all around: It crack’d and growl’d, and roar’d and howl’d – Like noises of a swound. (2011, 63– 4) The ‘otherness’ in such representations of ice suggests the currency of colonial readings of the Arctic as a place of desire and dread. Like other colonial locations, the Arctic was already cognitively mapped before it was explored, painted with a palette of British preconceptions and visions. At the beginning of Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus (1831 (original 1818)) Captain Walton writes to his sister that he tried in vain ‘to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination as the region of beauty and delight’ (Shelley, 1831, 3). Walton’s fantasies of geographic and scientific discovery were incubated by the narratives of Arctic explor- ation he found in his uncle’s library, but it is significant that he was dir- ectly inspired to voyage north by The Rime of the Ancient Mariner: I have often attributed my attachment to, my passionate enthu- siasm for, the dangerous mysteries of ocean, to that production of the most imaginative of modern poets. There is something at work in my soul, which I do not understand. I am practically industrious – pains-t aking; – a workman to execute with perseverance and toward no earthLy poLe 41 labour:– but besides this, there is a love for the marvellous, intertwined in all my projects, which hurries me out of the common pathways of men, even to the wild sea and unvisited regions I am about to explore (Shelley, 1831, 9). Walton’s reading reminds us of the predetermined nature of Arctic dreams. These textual representations were extremely influential in framing the way future British explorers and audiences described the North. Ships were also floating libraries and, as Urban Wråkberg (2007) points out, the work of the explorer also entailed sitting in an armchair and sifting through the accounts of previous navigators (explorers were also voracious readers of polar fiction and poetry; see Karamanski, 1984). When an explorer returned to Britain, his narrative would undergo further processes of mediation and translation, through what Bill Bell terms ‘filters of technology and taste’ (2013). The search for sub- lime Arctic experiences – Walton’s ‘love for the marvellous’ – must there- fore be thought of as something that involved intertextual dream-w ork. Explorers travelled through ice- fields of narrative, past bergs hiding masses of latent myths beneath their surface, all of which formed a ‘con- stellation of ideas’ that determined how the region was imagined (Said, 1995, 5; see also Driver, 2001). The spectral Arctic This notion of the spectral in this book is drawn from a research theme in the humanities and social sciences that reflects on the power of haunting as a figurative and non-fi gurative force. As explored variously by scholars in literary studies (Wolfreys, 2002), sociology (Gordon, 1997), phil- osophy (Derrida, 2006) and geography (Holloway and Kneale, 2008; Lipman, 2014), haunting is linked to questions of justice and exclusion. We all enjoy a good ghost story but how can we believe that the dead or disappeared have social agency in the cold light of day? The ghost is a sign that the past has returned to the present, revealing, in Jacques Derrida’s formulation, the ‘non-c ontemporaneity of the present time with itself’ (2006, 29). The spectral locates the traces and effects that are left when something that was present becomes absent. This theme looks at how power (or lack of power) in the past becomes manifest in the present and it is seen as particularly relevant to modernity. But why should ghosts be around in the present, supposedly a secular and disenchanted time? In recent years scholars have tackled the 42 the SpeCtraL arCtiC ‘disenchantment of the world’ thesis famously propounded by the soci- ologist Max Weber, who understood it to be a process that emerged with the scientific revolution and Protestant Reformation (Landy and Saler eds., 2009). For Weber, modernity is characterised by a process in which the natural world becomes less mysterious and more knowable, imper- sonal and predictable. On this account, secularisation and the decline of magic followed the increased power of the formal rationalities of science and bureaucracy. By contrast, revisionist scholars in the historical discip- lines highlight the significance and continuity of uncertainty in scientific systems of knowledge and look at themes like the urban ‘magical imagin- ation’ (Bell, 2012) or ‘occult’ Enlightenment science (Harvey, 2005). These revisionist accounts show that audiences do not simply have one attitude (believing) or another (disbelieving) when they attended séances, magic shows or lectures on animal magnetism. Rather, con- sumers of spectacles, just like Arctic explorers in the field, displayed a range of responses, many incommensurable and self- consciously enchanting. Oppositional scholarly notions like the spectral, the uncanny, or ‘cycles of re-e nchantment’ (Walsham, 2008), suggest that modernity can be seen as ‘haunted’: they challenge the idea of the rational western savant as somehow above the spectrum of spiritual, spectral and anom- alous beliefs we encounter in everyday life. My own interest in spectralities has previously centred on the sense of a haunted self (McCorristine, 2010). In this book I turn to the cultural production of the spectral. An obvious advantage of such an approach is that it creates a ground for dialogue between the inhabitants of the present and the past. In the case of Canada, this ground lies between European settlers and native inhabitants. The ghostliness of the Arctic has a long history, originating in the ways that British settlers made indigenous people part of a ‘gothic’ wilderness, on the borders of civil- isation. As I will mention in c hapter 6, critics using the notion of the spec- tral argue that Canada as a settler nation is indisputably haunted by the legacies of its colonial past (which it inherited from Britain) – a theme that figures heavily in contemporary Canadian literature, art and film. Despite this and even if we recognise the obvious differences between Britain’s possessions in the Arctic and its possessions in southern Canada, ghosts and ghostliness are strangely absent from historical scholarship on the Northwest Passage. The Franklin expedition is a presence that looms large in this book, a feature that it shares with some other recent studies (Potter, 2007; Davis- Fisch, 2012; Cavell, 2008). Franklin left London in 1845 in command of an expedition in search of a Northwest Passage made up of 128 men toward no earthLy poLe 43 onboard HMS Erebus and Terror. After stopping at Disko Bay in Greenland, the ships entered Baffin Bay where they were last seen by Europeans in July. Searchers later discovered that the expedition wintered on Beechey Island that year (where it buried three crew members who died – John Torrington, William Braine and John Hartnell), before sailing in a south- westerly direction into an unmapped region. By September 1846, the ships were frozen in the ice off the coast of King William Island (see F igure 1.4). According to a note discovered in a cairn on this island in 1859 by Francis Leopold McClintock’s expedition, Franklin died on 11 June 1847 and the icebound Erebus and Terror were abandoned in April 1848. Led by the second- in-c ommand Francis Crozier, the note stated that the surviving 105 men were about to commence a march south towards the Great Fish River – although whether this was intended as a final march by a single group of men is currently a hot topic of debate. It is likely that this was the first of several breakouts as the Erebus was probably re-m anned in late 1849 and piloted south by a small company before it sunk in shallow waters in Queen Maud Gulf. In any case, this torturous southern escape route proved fatal for ill-e quipped men who, by this stage, had split into different groups and were prob- ably debilitated by scurvy (Cyriax, 1939). Evidence from Inuit testi- mony recorded the sightings of bands of starving white men (‘all black, no fur’; Eber, 2008, xx) who ‘fell down and died as they walked along’ (McClintock, 1859, 275). The Inuit reported that these qallunaat carried iron, acted strangely and ate human flesh (Eber, 2008, 80). McClintock’s discovery of skeletons and relics years later failed to dampen interest in the mysteries of the expedition. Almost imme- diately Arctic veterans like Richard King and William Parker Snow campaigned for further expeditions, although it was several years before another explorer returned to the King William Island region in search of survivors, tombs, testimony or any paper records. In the late twentieth century, scientists and archaeologists confirmed Inuit accounts of canni- balism (see Beattie and Savelle, 1983; Keenleyside, Bertulli and Fricke, 1997; Potter, 2016), while in the last few years, teams sponsored by the Canadian government launched annual searches for the wrecks of the Erebus and Terror. These proved successful in 2014 and 2016. Whilst retaining it as a central story, I will say some new things about the Franklin expedition in an effort to make sense of its complex and spectral legacies in history and literature. In c hapters 3 and 4 this involves taking seriously the stories of ‘clairvoyants, visions, dreams, and revelations’ that McClintock dismissed in the search for Franklin (‘A Strange Tale of Handwriting on the Wall’, Pall Mall Gazette, 16 May, 44 the SpeCtraL arCtiC newgenrtpdf Figure 1.4 Map of the Canadian Arctic with inset. 1889). Looking at stories of dreams and ghosts promotes a shift in the scale of exploration, from the grand histories of naval commanders to the fractured and intimate voyages of writers, mummies, dreamers and clairvoyants. These dreams and visions did not come out of nowhere; they formed part of the social reality of Arctic exploration as a diverse set of practices that did not simply consist of narratives of manly endeavour meant for respectable readers. My approach also implies a shift in our notion of sequentiality: to quote Hamlet, time is ‘out of joint’ in the Arctic. History does not stop at one point and begin at another, nor do injustices or memories rot in the ground. What we think of as securely consigned to the past reappears and there is a ‘return of the repressed’ in both dreams and bodily movements – the repetitive disruption of what Freud termed the ‘uncanny’. In this book I show how non- explorers – those whom Barrow would have denigrated – created or gained access to the otherworldly Arctic. One advantage of a refusal to separate the spheres of men and women in this context is to further draw out the relations between home and Arctic, the ways that distance and loss came to be expressed and managed through the emotions. Through the materiality of the séance, the ghost story or the politics of haunting, people shared in the imaginaries and legacies of Arctic exploration. Whether through déjà-v u, the idea of home, or the practice of visiting old ‘haunts’, most of us occasionally feel that a place means more than what can be seen and consciously felt. The accounts of Arctic explorers show that they also sometimes recognised that ghosts and dreams were part of how place was felt. During a search for the Franklin expedition, the Arctic commander Edward Belcher mentioned seeing a wolf hanging around his ship that the men considered ‘charmed’. Some even thought the wolf was one of the officers of the Erebus: ‘It is a ridiculous feeling; yet who is free from it?’ Belcher wrote: ‘Indeed, I have been so far, at times, a victim to some such feeling, as even to attach the name of one of my friends to this cunning visitor!’ (1855, II, 128). Some years later the HBC trader Roderick MacFarlane removed the body of a colleague, Augustus Richard Peers, from Fort Good Hope for burial at Fort Simpson, as was his wish. MacFarlane reported hearing a voice directing the dog team on this journey and felt a ‘spiritual or supernatural presence of the late Mr. Peers’ at Fort Simpson: ‘The feeling, however, came on so very suddenly and scaringly that I instantly covered my face with the blanket and remained speechless’ (qtd. in Colombo ed., 2008, 162– 3). 46 the SpeCtraL arCtiC Although polar explorers dreamed every night, the transcription of remembered dreams in their narratives was rare.17 When they were recorded, dreams tended to involve food, warmth and home – the ‘mani- fest content’, we might say (see Hall, 1879, 211; Kane, 1856, I, 265; II, 42; Osborn, 1852, 219; ‘Arctic Dreams of Food’). Kane went into a bit more detail on this subject, mentioning how the men of the first Grinnell expedition (1850–1) talked of their dreams during the dark days around winter solstice time: Some had visited the naked shores of Cape Warrender, and returned laden with water-m elons. Others had found Sir John Franklin in a beautiful cove, lined by quintas and orange- trees. Even Brooks, our hard-fi sted, unimaginative boatswain, told me, in confidence, of having heard three strange groans out upon the ice. He ‘thought it was a bear, but could see nothing!’ (1854, 267) The period of winter was particularly dangerous for most expeditions as it was the time when access to fresh meat from hunting was restricted by the weather. December was therefore usually marked by the onset of scurvy, while the reopening of old scars, frostbite and the threat of fire on the ship were recurring matters of concern. These anxious times were reflected in the psychological disturbances reported by commanders. As men began to spend more time cooped up indoors they could become increasingly irritable and tetchy, while changes in sleep-p atterns caused bouts of sleep-t alking (Kane, 1856, I, 431; Young, 1875, 14). So when an explorer goes to the trouble of writing down a winter dream, it is not sur- prising to find that it contains themes of anxiety and conflict. A good example of this comes from Isaac Israel Hayes, who during an Arctic expedition dreamed about his fellow expeditioner, August Sonntag: I had a strange dream last night, which I cannot help mentioning; and, were I disposed to superstition, it might incline me to read in it an omen of evil. I stood with Sonntag far out on the frozen sea, when suddenly a crash was heard through the darkness, and in an instant a crack opened in the ice between us. It came so suddenly and widened so rapidly that he could not spring over it to where I stood, and he sailed away upon the dark waters of a troubled sea. I last saw him standing firmly upon the crystal raft, his erect form cutting sharply against a streak of light which lay upon the distant horizon (1867, 182). toward no earthLy poLe 47 Hayes’s dream occurred on 22 December 1860, during a period of prolonged darkness and gloominess at his expedition’s encampment at Port Foulke, west Greenland. This was a time Hayes described as ‘awe- inspiring and unreal’ (172). In November an Inuk member of the exped- ition, Peter, mysteriously ran away from the camp, an incident which Hayes attributed to the rivalry between him and another Inuk, the veteran hunter Hans Hendrik. Hayes worried about the fate of Peter for weeks after his disappearance and drew analogies between the worsening wea- ther and the fate of his former servant: The stiffened ropes which pound against the masts, the wind shrieking through the shrouds, the crashing of the snows against the schooner’s sides, are sounds of terror echoing through the night; and when I think that this unhappy boy is a prey to the pier- cing gale, I find myself inquiring continually, What could possibly have been the motive which led him thus to expose himself to its fury? (170) One answer came later from Hendrik, who recorded in his memoir the belief that Peter had turned into a ‘Kivigtok’ [Qivittoq] – a person who abandons the community and wanders the wilderness, perhaps as a ghost and possibly because of paranoia or feelings of alienation among his colleagues (1878, 37). Following the disastrous deaths of most of the expedition’s dogs it was arranged that Sonntag, who had served with Hayes previously, along with Hendrik, would sledge to the Inuit of the Northumberland Island region to purchase replacement dogs. Setting out on 21 December 1860, Sonntag and Hendrik encountered dreadful weather and the next day they resolved to return to camp. However, Sonntag fell through a sheet of ice and, although pulled out, was left, according to Hendrik, barely breathing in a blocked- up snow-h ouse while Hendrik unsuccess- fully sought help. News reached Hayes of Sonntag’s death in late January and Hayes’s mistrust of Hendrik again resurfaced. Although he never discussed the coincidence, the prescience of the dream of 22 December foreseeing Sonntag’s death must have forcibly struck him and exposes for us a material imagination which attributes magical status to the ice – the ‘crystal raft’ of the dream. It also hints at an ingrained culture of anxiety among explorers who overwintered. Although the recording of dreams of death was quite common among Euro-A mericans back home in the nineteenth century (McCorristine, 2010, 162), the particular image of an expeditioner floating away on ice actually reflects a realistic risk factor 48 the SpeCtraL arCtiC that Arctic explorers shared with indigenous inhabitants. Sonntag’s body was eventually recovered and buried in March 1861: although Hayes recounted the dream in his narrative of the expedition, the burial site shows that he resisted naming 22 December as the exact date of his friend’s death. Strange experiences like these clearly affected explorers, but Arctic narratives also contain less dramatic moments where the narrator drifts into a reverie, at times inspired by wandering through a landscape. During this activity, place is suddenly recognised as being populated by absent forces and it is at this moment that the notion of the Arctic as somehow spectral is drawn out. This involves the recognition that reveries and dreaming are not simply abstract and disembodied experiences for people, but forms of practice, like religious worship, inextricably linked to the various rhythms and tempos of space and time. The spectral Arctic, in other words, emerged through the interactions between people and places that felt strange to them. Arctic mobilities Another research trend of recent years looks at mobilities, a set of approaches that conceives of the human world on the move, physically and imaginatively (Sheller and Urry, 2006). Taking a mobilities perspec- tive on Arctic exploration offers obvious insights into the way we think of naval bodies onboard a ship. It also shows how traditionally neglected ‘unbounded’ spaces such as the air and the ocean can be brought into debates about human-e nvironmental interaction and shown to have their own landmarks and histories (Adey, 2010). For instance, Percy Bysshe Shelley’s valorisation of balloon travel across ‘unknown countries’ was informed by the way that Enlightenment ideology and technology had informed the imagination of the geographies of ‘unhappy’ lands (qtd. in Fulford, Lee and Kitson, 2004, 1). Similarly, after the return of Parry’s first expedition in search of a Northwest Passage in 1820, the poet John Keats spoke of how the sailors’ eyes: ... were so fatigued with the eternal dazzle and whiteness that they lay down on their backs upon deck to relieve their sight on the blue sky. [They described] the dreadful weariness at the continual day – the sun ever moving in a circle round their heads – so pressing upon him that he could not rid himself of the sensation even in the dark Hold of the ship (1899, 339). toward no earthLy poLe 49 On departing the Arctic for more southerly latitudes, Keats also mentioned that the sailors rushed upon deck to gaze at the stars which they had yearned to see all summer. So, while lunar bearings, star- gazing and other meteorological observations were obviously part of a wider geographical concern to the officers, incidents such as this serve to remind us that the cosmic worlds above the horizon were neither peripheral nor superfluous in the everyday lives of sailors on Arctic dis- covery service. The field of exploration need not be taken as purely earthbound – it can extend to our atmosphere. During the searches for the Franklin expedition, there were many desperate and imaginative attempts to communicate with the lost men. One scheme was the release of mes- senger balloons filled with hydrogen and attached to a slow-m atch. The idea was that the match burned off and caused colourful slips of paper to drop off the balloon at regular intervals. Other attempts included one, initiated by some ‘English ladies’, where dolls containing informa- tion about the location of rescue ships were distributed to Inuit women with the hope that they would one day make their way into the hands of the missing expeditioners (Bray, 1992, 21–2 ). Still another scheme was to release captured Arctic foxes that wore copper collars with rescue details attached (Osborn, 1852, 138). All of these mobilities reflect an understanding of the existence of different layers of place within a space to which British bodies had no access. Signs, rumours and visions of the Franklin expedition cropped up again and again, but their actual location in the Arctic was discussed in spectral terms as a result of their prolonged and haunting absence. The idea of maintaining links with absent explorers carried on into the twentieth century in the form of tele- pathic and spiritualistic experiments. In 1921, Danish explorer and anthropologist Knud Rasmussen, about to commence his epic Fifth Thule Expedition across the Arctic, ‘promised to place either himself or a sensitive Greenlander at the disposal of those engaged in psychical research, for an experiment in the receipt and despatch of telepathic reports’ (‘Telepathic Experiment’, Lancashire Evening Post, 1921). In 1937–8 the Australian polar explorer Hubert Wilkins participated in an extended long-d istance telepathic experiment during his search for the Soviet aviator Sigizmund Levanevsky, who went missing during a flight over the North Pole (Wilkins and Sherman, 1942). Finally, in the 1950s the Norwegian polar aviator Hjalmar Riiser- Larsen attempted to contact the spirit of Roald Amundsen, a close friend and colleague who disappeared in the Arctic during an air expedition in search of Umberto Nobile’s airship the Italia in 1928. Riiser- Larsen was 50 the SpeCtraL arCtiC prevented from taking this course by the Amundsen family, not because of their aversion to spiritualism, but because Riiser- Larsen had been excommunicated from Amundsen’s circle for posing for a photograph with his rival Nobile before Amundsen left on his last voyage (Berg, 2006, 132). Indeed, Amundsen himself professed to have telepathic powers around the time of this expedition (Anthi, 1999, 1002). Telepathic communications across great polar distances were one thing, but mobility matters in other ways too. The naval expeditions and whaling voyages moving through Arctic seas were ‘ship- shaped’. The ship has long been recognised in nautical traditions as an exten- sion of the sailor’s body and far from being background noise, the songs and sea-s hanties sung aboard critically informed the movement and tempo of sailors’ bodies (see Mack, 2011, 136–6 4; Podruchny, 2006; Arctic Miscellanies, 1852, 9–1 0). Like sailors, Admiralty ships in search of a Northwest Passage had to adapt to northern service. This called for technical and scientific (especially magnetic) instruments; air, fil- tration and cooking systems featured alongside preserved food (artifi- cially extending potential subsistence durations); and a cultural stowage made up of libraries and theatrical equipment to combat boredom and restlessness. In all of these ways ships emerge not just as vehicles but as key material spaces in Arctic exploration, transporting, housing, healing and entertaining their inhabitants. These complex spaces were points of departure for ‘spectral geographies’ of the Arctic during the early phase of Barrow’s quest for a Northwest Passage. toward no earthLy poLe 51