WHERE THINKING BEGINS. Thinking, skill in thinking, has a very quiet be- ginning. The musical staff has but five lines and four spaces, and you add very little above or below, yet upon this staff masters have written all the wonderful compositions of the ages. There are but ten figures, but they can easily express even John D. Rockefeller's wealth. There are hundreds of thousands of words coined from our few letters, and Mr. Roosevelt thinks we use far too many of them. j So thinking is built up in a simple way. There ¡ is nothing involved, but rather an adequate appre- < ciation of facts and truths, their relations and con- sequences. All of this can be, should be, fully de- j veloped in germ in the elementary schools, or, to 1 change the figure, the base line should be laid in < the elementary schools. It can be. <c Thinking begins with appreciation of single, < simple facts, and advances to appreciation of single, i simple truths. Appreciation is the first need of all thinking. ¿ Clear, accurate, distinct, vivid must be the con- t tribution which appreciation makes to the art of c thinking. Leave anything weak in the clearness, ^ accuracy, distinctness, or vividness of one's appre- ciation of a fact or a truth, and all that is built upon t it may fall at any minute. In my boyhood days the a Pemberton Mills of Lowell collapsed, killing many r of the employees. It made a much greater impres- 1: sion on me than did the San Francisco earthquake, a as I was told that it all resulted from a weak place a in one of the walls. Closely akin to the impression t which that made was a remark made by a teacher a who said much to emphasize it: "A chain is no t stronger than its weakest link." All this is seri- a ously true of thinking. a Logic, conclusions, brilliant flights of thought are no stronger than the weakest place in the ap- preciation of single facts and truths. A certain writer on education in 1906 had a noble purpose, a worthy motive, but he could not put facts cor- rectly, could not put his figures together so that two and two would make four, and consequently his whole brilliant structure collapsed. Ah earth- quake could not have shattered a toy house more completely than the exposure of the inseca ri ty and unreliability of his figures disposed of his criticisms and comments. The schools from the first can, should, must give a habit of appreciating every fact in which any in- terest is taken, every fact likely to be of use in any wider range of thinking. Appreciation of uninteresting facts with little children is as undesirable as it is impracticable. Herbart has not put the case a whit too forcibly, so far as little children are concerned, when he insists upon interest in all their work. ■ ».». OUR DEBT TO HUMANITY. There has been no sentiment With a ring more true or more needed than this: - "Folly's crown of follies is on the head of him who tries to pay his debt to humanity by mere money," which characterizes the whole article by William Allen White in the October number of the American Magazine. - THE MAN WHO SHOULD BE CONTENTED. There is no virtue in contentment as such, nor is there virtue in discontent. Whoever predicates universal virtue in any proverb or principle leaving out the human personality and environment is usually an intellectual weakling. There are men who should be content, as there are those who should be discontented. Speaking from extended observation, the following fellow should be contented. He is à professor in a state educational institution, and has been for several Pears. Ha may never be the president, of that it is impossible to prophesy, but he is known and be- oved by every student in his day, and is highly re- spected, also, by the earlier alumni. He is given ibundant opportunity to do institute work and Dther le turing in the state, from which he must eceive more than half as much as from his salary, rhere are not more than five men in the state who ire as highly appreciated or as influential educa- ionally. His total income is adequate for the kind )f life that he is expected to lead, and he is always netting ahead. He ought to be contented, but at times he is said o chafe because he will probably never be quoted is the head of anything; because he will never be eputed as having more than $2,000 salary. He ias been told that he could get a superintendency it $2,500 and has been talked of as a president of m institution. Some friends (?) of his tell him hat he lacks ambition because he doesn't get out nd hustle for something bigger. Some of us think hat he is one of the men who should be contented nd thankful for the combination of income and ppreciation, of opportunity and influence. Óétober té, 19Ù6 JTÓtJtóíAti OF EDUCATION 4àà JOHN BROWN AND PRANK SANBORN. It has been my rare privilege on two recent occa- sions to journey with Frank B. Sanborn, who is as delightful a conversationalist as I know. He was related to John Brown and Henry David Thoreau as was no other mari now living, yes, of their own day, even. This is peculiarly truë as to John Brown, ,and the numerous incidents touched upon from time to time iii one lorig day's travel led me to reread with keenest relish Mr. Sanborn's "Life and Letters of John Brown," and I can but take time and space to say that it is well worth any onťš time to read so much of this book* as is necessary to an appreciation of the life, experience, and con- viction of the man who was largely responsible for the crisis that produced the Emancipation proc- lamation. John Brown was executed December 2, 1859. On January 1, 1863, about four years later, all slaves under the stars and stripes were emancipated. Who could have anticipated such a result in four brief years ? On that memorable Emancipation day in 1863 a marble bust of John Brown was unveiled in Medford, Massachusetts, on which occasion Wendell Phillips made a notable address and read two sonnets on John Brown by Frank B. Sanborn. Steadily for the more than forty years that have passed since that day of days, the world has come to see more and more clearly the part John Brown's execution played in the Emancipation proclama- tion. It was a clear case of the death of a man for a race. nf vííífiíx^íísff °I B™*n» Liberator of Kansas, and Martyr tm pp. nf Pr/oL Price, $2.00. io n? Boston 4 Fr*I*k ,B- Sanborn. Cloth. Illustrated. Martyr 645 tm pp. Price, $2.00. io Boston : Little, Brown & Co. »»»fi HIGH SCHOOL OF COMMERCE. The high school of commerce is a recent con- ception and has not even now been generally ac- cepted by the educators or the public as wholly legitimate in the public school scheme. Originally the Latin school was the only conception of a high school. Then came the English high school, which had great difficulty in maintaining high school rank until the mechanics arts or manual training de- partment came along. Now the Latin school often fails to retain the leadership. The school of com- merce will undoubtedly win its place. The days of barter and small trading have given way to the days of organization upon an increasingly large scale. Commerce to-day approaches the dignity of a science. Sciences require training, so that it is natural that modern commerce demands a more complete educational equipment. Efficiency in modern business affairs requires more than mere bookkeeping and facility in the manual accomplish- ments, such as stenography and typewriting. Much of the current conception of what constitutes a business education errs in failing to recognize the larger requirements. The arts and sciences which are the inheritance of the race are essentials in the intellectual equipment of every aspirant for business success. The program of a progressive in- stitution for commercial training includes the sub- jects usually found in all liberally inclined schools. More and more tradition gives place to scientific knowledge, and commercial and mercantile life must follow the tendency of the times, and, if so, schools of commerce are indispensable. NEW YORK'S GREAT LEAD. New York state is to lead the world in an educa- tional building, four million dollars having been ap- propriated for this purpose. Of this $400,000 has been paid for a lot. The building will be 660 feet long, and 330 feet in greatest depth, whilé the main building is 140 feet deep. There will be 350,000 square feet of floor space, of which 54,300 square feet will be devoted to the administrative officés, 237,500 to the state library^ and the rest to a V natural history museum. The commissioner of education is to have two large rooms with 1,400 feet of space. There is to be an audience room o! 10,000 square feet. In all the department will have eighteen suites of rooms. DANGER LIMIT IN DISPOSITION. There are many more accidents in mills and fac- tories the last half hour of the forenoon and after- noon than the first. Accident insurance com- panies in Great Britain have conducted investiga- tions running over many years until it is made clear that carelessness grows from the opening to the close of the forenoon, and then starts over again in the afternoon, though the first half hour is not quite so free from mishaps. Every effort is taken, therefore, to impress the need of care as the hours grow. It would be well for teachers to realize that fatigue is a real fact; that, as the session of the school lengthens, each day, the danger limit of dis- position with teacher as well as pupils is ap- proached. The place for music, physical exercises, and everything that lessens intense mental applica- tion is in the closing period of the session. LONDON'S PROVISION FOR CLEANLINESS. In order to maintain the sanitary condition of the schools, the head teacher of each department is held responsible for seeing that the following regu- lations are carried out: - The whole premises are to be properly ven- tilated, both during school hours and after the chil- dren (have left. The rooms are to be washed at least once every three weeks except where otherwise ordered by the committee. Children who may present themselves in a dirty condition are to be required to wash at once ; and, if further purification is needed, to be sent home for the purpose. Each child in the school is to be provided with a peg, on which must be hung its cap, bonnet, cloak, or shawl. Any bad smells arising from defective drainage are to be reported at once to the head office. The urinals and drains must be sluiced out twice a day, viz., in the middle of the day and after school in the evening. Schoolkeepers 'are not supplied with disinfec- 424 JÒUftfrAl, Of ÉDtJČATlOK October 1&. l«K tants, as the committee are of opinion that if the troughs, urinals, and w.c.'s are systematically and thoroughly flushed in accordance with the code of instructions for the guidance of schoolkeepers, the use of disinfectants will be unnecessary. In the event of it becoming necessary to disinfect a school or schoolkeeper's house, the local authorities must be requested to carry out the work. -#.».».■ BOSTON'S HALF-PAY PLAN. Boston has done more things of advantage to the schools and teachers in the past eight months than any other city in the United States. One of the new features is that by which any teacher who has served the city for seven years may be given a year's leave of absence that may, under the direction of the superintendent, be devoted to improvement by study and travel. The teacher will be under obliga- tion to make such reports as the superintendent may require, and to remain in the service of the city for three years after the leave expires. SCHOOL BOILER EXPLOSION. There should never be a boiler in the basement of a school building, but there are thousands of them, and, so long as there are, occasional explo- sions are inevitable. At no distant day it will be a crime to permit a boiler to remain where the weak- ness and wear of material, or the limitations and frailties of human nature may take a large number suddenly into eternity, but until that time every conceivable precaution should be taken, not only in regard to avoiding accidents, but to have teachers and children taught to meet such emergencies when they arise. In the John M. Smyth school, Chicago,. recently, 1,000 pupils were jeopardized by such a boiler ex- plosion, but a level-headed corps of teachers led them out in safety under most trying circum- stances. $ i, EDUCATIONAL REFERENDUM. The introduction of the referendum into school affairs is creating much interest. Several superin- tendents, with the consent of their boards of educa- tion, now take a vote of the parents on every im- portant departure in which they are interested. In Portland, Maine, for instance, Superintendent W. H. Brownson was asked by a few parents to ex- tend the noon hour from 1.30 to 2 p. m. Some did not want it, and he took a parents' vote with the result that 1,773 wanted it and only 199 opposed it. Superintendent Charles H. Morss of Medford had a similar proposition as to having one session through September. There were two sides to the question until the parents' vote, when it was almost as one-sided as in Portland. MASSACHUSETTS HIGH SCHOOLS. In 1867 - forty years ago - it was Boston's proud boast that seven of every thousand of her popula- tion were in the high schools. Then the propor- tion of well-to-do citizens was much larger than to- day. In forty years, especially since the develop- ment of parks and boulevards, the suburbs have taken a large percentage of the class of people who then patronized the high, schools. Nevertheless Suffolk county (Boston) to-day has thirteen of every thousand in the high schools and the aver- age for the state is fifteen. Middlesex county has nineteen in 1,000, Norfolk has twenty-two, and Franklin, twenty. The lowest is in Berkshire, where it is down to twelve. Of the cities, Melrose leads with thirty-five' to the 1,000, and of the towns Concord and Winchester lead with fifty and forty respectively. : : NEW USE OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES. The New York public library has made an im- portant departure in relating the library to the school. In each schoolroom in the city is placed a card eight by fifteen inches, giving the location of the nearest branch of the public library, and stating the subjects, in the class work of that grade for each week, in which the library will give aid. For in- stance, in seventh grade, October 1-5, "The Crusade" ; October 8-12, "The Holy Grail" ; Octo- ber 15-19, "The Great Charter"; October 22-26, "House of Commons." ♦ » »ê»M School punishments are more and more hazard- ous. Whether right or wrong the 'public is in- tensely prejudiced against corporal punishments. Every week and almost every day some teacher somewhere is in court or in trouble out of court for severity in punishment. Now no punishments are as severe as they used to be, but a slight chastise- ment 'causes more disturbance nowi than a flogging did a few years ago. The less we tempt the public the better. Miss Alice C. D. Riley's "Elements of English Verse Correlated to Music" is as important a book as has appeared in many a day if I am any judge of what the schools need and of what this book can do for teachers and pupils alike. You can know a child much better by playing with him than by teaching him. He will also know you better, a fact never to be forgotten. Think of one deal in lumber in Washington, in- volving 900,000, on which a profit of $40,000,000 was realized in six years. In many cities and counties there have been ten times as many teachers in summer schools as there were five years ago. Child labor laws are indispensable, but they can easily be made ridiculous. .A pupil out of harmony with his environment is in a way diseased. There is no lack of excitement in the school life of Chicago. The college cannot give a man what he will not take. ' <