8The Rise of the Digital Public THE COPYRIGHT WARS CONTINUE IN THE NEW MILLENNIUM In our new millennium we are once again caught in the crossfire between rights owners—authors and assignees—and the audience. Digitality has both promised untrammeled access and strengthened the grip of owners on their property. At the extremes digital millen- nialists do battle with copyright fundamentalists. Binary technolo- gies have changed the game, claim the millennialists. Allowing uni- versal and largely costless access to all knowledge, they transform creativity into a collective endeavor, expose how all works are ulti- mately derivative, and outmode private ownership and individual control. Poppycock, retort the fundamentalists. No system has stimu- lated creativity more than individual property rights traded on a free market. We enjoy an unprecedented cultural surfeit today precisely because the market for exclusive authorial rights has allowed us to dispense with patronage and emoluments, turning authors into in- tellectual entrepreneurs. Digitality may ease transactions, rendering the intellectual marketplace ever more fine grained and flexible. But even as the techniques of exchange modernize, the basic rules of strong authorial property remain valid. In the 1990s the battle was fought largely in the United States. Here, the conversion of the Clinton administration to the Berne ide- ology of iron- clad intellectual property rights yanked traditional American policy around in a volte-f ace. With so drastic a change of course, protest followed. Opposition to the content industries and their victories in the legislation of the 1990s was mobilized both in academia and on the emergent digital street. Hackers and cyberanar- The Rise of the Digital Public 319 chists rallied along with law professors and librarians to proclaim the virtues of open access and demand a return to the copyright tradi- tion of an expansive public domain. What was new in America, how- ever, was old hat in Europe. There, the new technologies were not yet considered reason to tamper with authorial rights. But even on the Continent digitality eventually forced a reconsideration of inherited pieties. The new technologies of cultural creation and dissemination posed both aesthetic and legal issues. When culture was produced ever more collectively and in full recognition of how even original works borrowed from others, did any one author deserve the venera- tion and power he was granted by the classic authors’ rights ideol- ogy? If the Enlightenment vision of opening culture to everyone at almost no cost could finally be realized, were there not better ways of stimulating creativity than the old system of making works artifi- cially scarce by pretending that they were a form of property? Such questions, first raised in the United States, were now taken up in Europe too. They were thrashed out with particular vehemence in France, where authors had hitherto enjoyed robust protection. The born- digital generation, unimpressed by the inherited orthodoxy of strong authorial rights, began to influence the French left. Even in the heartland of authors’ rights, pirate parties and downloading activ- ists broached themes that sounded suspiciously like those of classic Anglo- American copyright. For the first time since the interwar fas- cists had tainted its needs with their totalitarian populism, the audi- ence was being actively spoken for on the continent. Having won the battle of the 1990s, Berne’s ideologists suddenly found themselves at the dawn of the new millennium fighting a whole new war against a demanding, downloading public. NOT AS UNIQUE AS WE MIGHT THINK However current these debates, they also resonate with themes we have traced over three centuries. Above all, whose claims are para- mount, those of author or audience? Until recently, the Continental nations played little role in these disputes. Thanks to their venera- 320 Chapter 8 ble authors’ right tradition, they plumped for creators and owners. Only in the past few years have Europeans begun questioning their inherited orthodoxies. But in the Anglophone world current debates broadly continue the ongoing antagonism of author and audience that fired the Talfourd controversy in Britain in the 1830s and stoked the endless American discussions throughout the nineteenth century over the worth of copyright at all. Plus ça change. Much of the commentary on digitality and its cultural conse- quences sounds like what precedes the burst of economic bubbles: the happytalk that this time is different. But historians are by instinct and training allergic to claims of absolute rupture.1 Where others discern a radical break, they find precedents and continuities with the past. Rarely have the claims for far-r eaching novelty been voiced as insistently as for the digital revolution and its cultural implica- tions. Cultural theorists, jurists, and literary critics all agree. It is per- haps an exaggeration to suggest that the debates of our own era farci- cally repeat earlier ones—as Marx concluded when comparing Louis Napoleon to his uncle, the first Napoleon. But healthy skepticism can usefully be applied to the millennial, sometimes apocalyptic, tenor of today’s discussion. Every age narcissistically considers itself unique. How quickly we moderns forget! In the past, many disruptive technologies have pro- vided an expanding public with new, more accessible, and cheaper versions of art and culture. Those left behind—like the sheet- music publishers, outmaneuvered by the sound- recording industry in the late nineteenth century—have often cried foul. Sometimes, after an initial stumble, they have seized the opportunities again. Painters did it with engraving in the eighteenth century and so did the film in- dustry a hundred years later, when videos and DVDs went from being bugbears to boons. Each broadening of accessibility has pro- voked grumbling from cultural conservatives, fearful lest the masses use their newfound enlightenment for their own purposes—as well as overjoyed optimism from reformers, delighted at similar pros- pects. The monks with their chained and locked illuminated manu- scripts were aghast at the flood of print books that Gutenberg un- leashed. So were bibliophiles at cheap reprints in the nineteenth century, not to mention the paperback avalanche of the twentieth. The Rise of the Digital Public 321 A few reminders are in order. “Quantity is the new quality,” it is claimed in this era of data surfeit.2 But we are not the first to live in an information age nor to fear information overload. The Siku Quanshu, a compendium of works produced during the Qing Dy- nasty in the 1770s and ’80s, comprised 36,000 volumes in seven copies (one of which survives in Beijing’s Forbidden City). In words (800 million) it was surpassed only recently by the English-l anguage Wiki- pedia (one billion as of June 2010).3 Nor is piracy new. Hollywood fears videotapers in first-r un cinemas. Nineteenth- century London theaters had stenographers in the audience. A West End hit could open on Broadway within the week.4 The US edition of one of Wal- ter Scott’s last works, printed from purloined sheets, appeared earlier than the London one.5 Today, as well as yesterday, print pirates have been hailed as the Robin Hoods of intellectual property—fighters against censorship and for unhampered circulation, broad access, and universal illumi- nation.6 Eighteenth- century Europe was lousy with pirates. Scoffing at the Parisian publishers’ claims to own works perpetually, the book- sellers of the French provinces justified their piracy as enlightening the public.7 Ludwig Christian Kehr could hardly have been more explicit in his Defense of Piracy (1799). The rich often buy books but do not read them, he argued. Meanwhile, others cannot afford even indispensable works. Only unauthorized reprinting keeps such evils in check, spreading enlightenment to all.8 To keep the heirs of men of genius protected for fifty years after their deaths, Frederick Booth argued in Parliament in 1911, contravened British liberty. Time in- stead to celebrate the pirate, poacher, and smuggler—the practi- tioners of the fine art of free trade.9 Nineteenth- century America was unrepentantly the world’s pre- mier pirate. Sucking the marrow of British and European publishers’ lists, it justified itself by ringing appeals to universal literacy, broad education, and the needs of a populist democracy. Cheap books, Wil- liam Leggett, Jacksonian democrat and journalist, insisted in 1837, are the friend of humanity. “If there were no copyright laws, all literature would take a cheap form, and all men would become readers.”10 Such pronouncements are echoed in today’s arguments for a freewheeling web of bottomless information and universal access. 322 Chapter 8 One justification for pirating, often heard in the digital age, is that, by increasing a work’s renown and market appeal, unauthorized edi- tions actually benefit the original author. Information wants to be free, is the digiterati mantra. A work gains in value not from copy- right’s corset of artificial scarcity but by wide dissemination, argues John Perry Barlow—Grateful Dead lyricist, rancher, and internet vi- sionary.11 Such logic has been a leitmotif across the history of the printed word. In 1824 Leopold Neustetel conceded that a cheap and corrupted edition might whet the appetite for the better and pricier version. A book was recommended, as it were, when a pirate edition appeared.12 This was the Lebenslüge of the nineteenth- century Amer- ican publishing industry. Though British authors were not paid, US editions buffed their reputations and enhanced their rewards at home.13 “Books, it is quaintly said, sell one another,” the Senate re- ported in the early nineteenth century. “Every book that is read makes a market for more even of the same character. Mind, unlike matter, hungers upon that on which it feeds.”14 Copyright imposes an artificial scarcity to create value for authors. But the public craves cheap, easy access. How to reconcile such op- posites? A common proposal for the digital age is to license works, guaranteeing authors royalties and the audience access. Such ideas are not new either. Testifying before the Royal Copyright Commis- sion of 1878, Louis Mallet argued that compulsory licensing and free competition among publishers benefited both authors and public, “the first by an extended circulation of his works, and the second by a reduction in their cost.”15 In 1928 Julius Kopsch, the reforming Wei- mar jurist who remained active under the Nazis, presciently antici- pated why digitality and licensing would come to seem a perfect couple. Granting publishers exclusive rights is unnatural, he argued, since authors prefer to have their works widely disseminated in many editions. But given the expense of issuing works, publishers require a temporary monopoly to recoup costs. If one day a new technology allowed dissemination at a negligible cost, authors would naturally want to license.16 The content industries are often accused of having been especially active in reaffirming possession of works in recent years.17 Much as owners fenced common lands in the eighteenth century, expelling The Rise of the Digital Public 323 the peasants who had worked them and rationalizing agriculture, this modern lockup of works has been described as “the second en- closure movement.”18 But the current appropriation of works is no greater than during the vast expansion of rights in the late nine- teenth century, when film, photography, phonograph, radio, and other new media became protected. If anything, it is the contrast with digitality’s promise of universal access that makes content own- ers’ reasserted claims so provocative today. Many of the aesthetic developments that postmodernism and digitality stake as their particular claims are also not as new as often thought. The audience’s participation in creativity and the conse- quent blurring of the line between authors and their recipients is far from unprecedented. Think only of the cheap pamphlets and the penny press in Britain, France, and the United States from the latter half of the eighteenth century on. Every Grub Street publisher fired off blunderbuss salvoes of ephemera. Everyone who could write was a writer. The first recognizably modern and democratized mass media emerged two and a half centuries ago.19 Those armies of hacks, titillating readers with scandal, sex, and sedition, were at least half- way to the audience- as- author concept that is supposedly so charac- teristic of digitality. They can reasonably be compared with today’s bloggers. With wood-p ulp paper and steam- driven presses, the price of information plummeted. The vast dissemination of works in nineteenth- century America—entire novels in single, affordable broadsheet periodicals, Dickens serialized on the back of railway timetables—spread enlightenment as efficiently and effectively as the age of paper allowed. The cheap press, as one mid- century observer hailed it, “puts every mind in direct communication with the greatest minds. . . . It is the great leveler, elevator and democratizer.”20 Contemporaries then described themselves as living in “the era of broad- cast publication.”21 When nineteenth- century British publish- ers issued leather- bound, triple- decker editions for the wealthy, the gulf between expensive and cheap was not appreciably wider than it is today, when we compare the overpriced CD (ask your parents) and the MP3 download that may seem free but requires devices, broad- band, and electricity.22 Yes, digitality has almost banished the physical scarcity that still hobbled analog reproduction. But the basic di- 324 Chapter 8 lemma of dealing with cheap and illicit plenitude has been with us for some time now. Much the same holds for the actual creation of works. The narra- tor of Washington Irving’s essay “The Mutability of Literature” (1819) heralded the age of “excessive multiplication” where paper and the press had ended the physical restraints of the parchment and quill era and made “every one a writer, and enabled every mind to pour itself into print, and diffuse itself over the whole intellectual world.”23 The eighteenth century would not have been surprised by staples of the modern aesthetic, like the idea that works are partly created in their reception, or even a sense of the hive mind and the public’s beneficent influence in improving and changing works. Already then the themes of what we now consider postmodernist reception theory could be heard. “Knowledge has no value or use for the soli- tary owner,” Lord Camden argued during Donaldson (1774), the foun- tainhead case of the classic copyright tradition. “To be enjoyed it must be communicated.”24 In 1793 J. G. Fichte emphasized how the reader reformulated a work’s ideas in his own mind, making it as much his as the origi- nal author’s.25 For Wilhelm Kramer in 1827, its reception was even more important than the work itself. The reader’s thoughts, though prompted by the work, were his own, not the author’s, and were often very different.26 “Without the public, literary property would not exist,” Narcisse- Achille de Salvandy, minister of education in the French July Monarchy, pronounced in 1839. “The poet, the historian or the playwright creates the writing [l’écrit], the public turns it into a work [le livre].”27 Othmar Spann, the conservative interwar Aus- trian social philosopher, insisted that the individual creator was nothing without a community to receive his thoughts.28 As the Nazis put it, “A radio program without an audience is not broad- casting [Denn eine Sendung ohne Hörer ist kein Rundfunk].”29 THE BATTLE HEATS UP New technologies have changed how works are produced and dis- seminated. But the fundamental disputes over authors’ rights have The Rise of the Digital Public 325 remained remarkably consistent during the past three centuries. Alongside exclusive authorial rights and royalties other means to re- ward creators survive. Patronage for officially favored authors contin- ued in the socialist nations. It also endured, and even thrived, under capitalism. In Western Europe the cultural bureaucrats have been latter- day Medicis, from the BBC to the FilmFernsehFonds Bayern. Selected Swedish artists and writers are directly salaried by the state. Absent government initiative in America, universities have taken up the slack. Without them, what we quaintly call “serious” music would scarcely exist, and many more novelists and poets—now teaching creative writing—would be seeking day jobs. And for the sciences, vast government funding supports a mega-b illion- dollar global re- search complex. Though theoretically unnecessary in an efficiently functioning cultural market, prizes to reward creativity are not only still with us, they are enjoying their best years ever. Think only of the Nobel, Field, Pritzker, Pulitzer, MacArthur, Goncourt, Booker, and so forth.30 Yet the authorial marketplace remains the system of choice. De- spite the claims that property is based on natural rights, in practice its possession hinges entirely on the rights granted owners in statute. Since—thanks to its intangibility—intellectual property is even more contrived than conventional property, the defining, validating, and enforcing of its claims requires constant negotiation. Except for the most hermetically private pleasures, the “owners” of intellectual property have to disgorge it. There is no naturally exclusive right to its use, as for tangible property. Indeed, by virtue of its nature, the point of intellectual property is to ensure its widest possible dissemi- nation, not to keep it for private enjoyment. But having in effect given it away, intellectual property’s owners also want to control it sufficiently to reap their reward. The two systems of protecting creativity—authors’ rights and copyright—diverge over how to deal with what follows then, upon dissemination. If authors are to be rewarded only as required to stim- ulate them to further efforts, then their claims will be minimized to the most efficient levels—enough to keep them productive but no more. If, in contrast, we assume that authors own their works as farm- ers own their land, then their claims will start at perpetuity and be 326 Chapter 8 beaten back only by the practicalities of enforcing eternal claims to matters intellectual (who are Homer’s heirs?) and a grudging admis- sion that in the (distant) future, works should perhaps pass from private possession to the common patrimony. The United States is often accused of having been motivated by its content industries, with Disney in the vanguard, to push through a new property-b ased approach to authors’ rights during the 1990s.31 Though true for the late twentieth century, in a longer historical perspective this seems anomalous. Traditionally, American priorities favored the public domain, not authors. As it joined Berne in 1989, the United States adopted the European idea of strong authorial property rights. Admittedly, it also viewed moral rights skeptically, but not more so than the British, nor even than the Scandinavians, the Dutch, and other European nations outside the Franco- German core. Seen historically, the main shift of recent years has followed the direction espoused all along by the Berne tradition, favoring thick protection for authors and assignees. It has been the Anglophones— not France or Germany—who have readjusted their overall approach most, although certain economic interests naturally cheered them on. During the 1990s the Anglo- American content industries man- aged to hijack a national agenda that had not traditionally favored strong claims for rights owners. In Europe, where the Berne ideology had dominated since the late nineteenth century, little change was required. The Americans, as one French observer noted, have dra- matically reoriented themselves, moving from an almost blanket re- jection of intellectual property to now favoring it in order to con- quer new markets.32 The standard European position of support for authors’ claims had become the new normal. But the battles of the current era have called this cramped consensus on the Berne ideol- ogy into question. CREATIVITY IN THE DIGITAL AGE First and foremost, digitality has questioned the Romantic idea of the artist creating solo from his own unique resources. Both the pro- The Rise of the Digital Public 327 duction and dissemination of works, the heralds of the digital era have claimed, were changed fundamentally by the new technologies. Culture is produced not ex nihilo by the solitary artist in his garret. It emerges out of collaboration, sharing, and borrowing across time and borders. The audience does not just consume culture but creates it too. As decentralized and cooperative networks of far- flung indi- viduals connect via the web, the old centralized mass media and their large, highly capitalized corporations seem outmoded. Today’s dis- tributed networks trump yesterday’s pantopticon media. The digite- rati claim that open source tools, universally available content, and free expression are replacing intellectual property and exclusive rights as the pertinent concepts.33 In some respects this post-R omantic attitude to authorship and creativity has returned to earlier conceptions. Our view of the author as socially embedded in his age and society would not have surprised the Renaissance. Then as now authors were seen as artisans. Working in groups they readily used others’ ideas and drew on their culture’s common patrimony. They rarely earned their keep by selling their art. As the digiterati see it, our culture too is collaborative, derivative, and based on reassembling existing materials. Appropriation Art and Plunderphonics elevate plagiarism to a cultural strategy.34 Digitality’s effortless scavenging allows fragments of existing works to be mashed up, altered, commented on, and resituated. Bricolage, along with pas- tiche and parody, are hailed as the building blocks of the postmod- ern aesthetic.35 Copying becomes the foundational creative act.36 Beginning already at the end of the analog age, in the 1970s and ’80s, such socialized creativity has accelerated in the digital era. Musi- cal sampling in rap and hip-h op was made possible, or at least easy, by digitality.37 Reversing Sousa’s turn- of-t he- century railing against canned music and cultural decline as sound recordings undermined music making, law professors now celebrate mash- ups (compilations of favorite music) and other pastiches as digital folk creativity. They represent a return to the participatory culture of the era when music was played and not just listened to.38 Sampling’s popularity has made it a testing ground for what artists can borrow, spawning case law and a large literature.39 Remixology uses similar techniques on writ- ten and video works.40 Patchwriting appropriates others’ texts in new 328 Chapter 8 combinations.41 The Flarf poets trawl the net, combining the results of their searches into novel works. The new ethos can be found across digital creativity. Devotees churn out fan fiction—rewritings, elabo- rations of original works, and spin- offs. So active are they that origi- nal authors have sometimes been accused of plagiarizing their own fans’ plotlines.42 Remix culture elevates cut-a nd- paste from a software command to a cultural habit of mind. Why bother inventing fic- tional realities, David Shields has wondered, when the world pro- vides so much that literature can just take?43 Whatever the truth of such claims for modern collaborative cre- ativity, they are widespread and influential.44 Crowds are wise, the advocates of the new digital creativity insist. Bacteria are cleverer than chimps.45 Great engineering feats, whether airplanes or soft- ware, are the work of large teams. Excepting a couple antiquated genres, few major creations today are accomplished by one person— be it a car, bridge, building, medicine, computer program, or film. In the hard and social sciences, engineering, and even the humanities, work is done by teams rather than solo authors. Measured by citation intensities, the quality of group work has surpassed that of individual authors.46 In every field except literature, and possibly economics, the Nobel Prize committees struggle annually with their inherited maxi- mum of three awardees, when easily dozens are equal participants. Digitality has affected the author, too, and not just the work. If not dead, he has moved from his garret into an open-p lan office or an internet café. And he shares the limelight with his audience. The distinction between creators and the public has been effaced, the Swedish Pirate Party announced confidently in its election mani- festo for 2010. In today’s new participant culture everyone writes blogs, comments on others’ postings, and uploads clips to YouTube.47 Consumer and author seem to meld.48 Presuming a Romantic au- thorial singularity, the classic moral rights—as we have seen in the previous chapter—seem out of place in our era of collaborative cre- ativity and derivation. If the post- Romantic author is a magpie, as- sembling existing materials into new works, are his creations origi- nal or authentic? If art is self- expression, whose personality is voiced when creativity means reassembling others’ self- expressions?49 Sher- rie Levine rephotographed Walker Evans’s photographs. Having The Rise of the Digital Public 329 trampled on his disclosure, attribution, and integrity rights, did she expect her own?50 At its most messianic the digital vision has heralded a new hive- mind creativity and a faith in the wisdom of crowds. In 2006 Kevin Kelly, co- founder of Wired magazine, portrayed the Google Books project in Dionysian terms. To have the world’s cultural patrimony universally available would be bliss. But it also announced a whole new approach to content itself. Once all works are digitized and searchable, the identity of each individual work—book, chapter, ar- ticle, poem, blog—could dissolve into the oceanic textual whole. As every reference hyperlinks to all others, the boundaries would fall apart, readers plunging and dipping, recombining and reshaping what they find into a personal collage. “Once text is digital, books seep out of their bindings and weave themselves together.” Digitally combined, books would merge into the “collective intelligence of a library.” All books together become one massive tome, “a single liq- uid fabric of interconnected works and ideas.”51 As the digiterati saw it, modern collectivist cultural production would replace the old model of individuals selling rights to their autonomously created works. Given that works were inherently col- lective, they were for the taking. New models of dissemination were based on free sharing more than on market exchange. The new para- digm was no longer the house but the village commons. Creative Commons and similar organizations developed alternatives to copy- right’s individualized markets. Open access spread, especially in the universities where authors are salaried and motivated mainly by reputation and truth seeking.52 The digital millennialists held out little comfort for the Romantic creator. As in the age of the bards, digital culture was ever fluid, not belonging to any one person. The author was, like Homer, simply someone through whom the work passed. Authors’ social importance would diminish as digitality leached away the myth of singular creativity, Barlow warned in 1994. “Creative people may have to renew their acquaintance with humil- ity.”53 The independent author was advised to get a regular job. Musi- cians would earn more from performing than recording and more on selling paraphernalia than on their albums.54 Writers would have to become teachers as well.55 330 Chapter 8 THE REFORMERS REGROUP Digital technology made reproducing content faultless, easy, and cheap. The remaining physical and economic limits to distribution, possession, and use paled compared to the legal ones. By allowing universal dissemination, digitality forced a rethinking of how to dis- tribute and reward works. In the analog era price was a mechanism of allocating scarce resources. Above and beyond the manufacturing costs of reproduction, copyright imposed artificial scarcity, generat- ing extra, socially created value for owners. Digital media’s almost costless dissemination therefore shone a harsh and unforgiving light on copyright’s monopoly, exposing the palisades it threw up to uni- versal enjoyment. As the album, film, and book etherealized into the digital download, seat- of- the- pants economics discounted the real expenses of production to focus on the falling price of reproduction. Should content not be cheap, or even free? Yet in legal terms, the rights holders’ position in the digital age remained broadly what it had been since the eighteenth century. Though owners never achieved perpetuity, their claims had expanded and lengthened. At the close of the twentieth century, they were stronger than ever. Three centuries earlier, booksellers alone had faced down the royal administration. Now large and powerful con- tent industries lobbied for their privileges. Those who violated their claims were harshly punished. Increasingly, all copyright breaches were criminalized. Earlier, only commercial pirates who made thou- sands of copies for profit risked prosecution. Now, even individuals who copied for private use or shared copies for free were pursued.56 American law allowed infringers to be pursued for statutory dam- ages, in addition to actual harm. Six- or even seven- figure fines were the possible outcome. Few other countries followed suit.57 But in criminal law the distinctions were less stark. In America pirates could be sentenced to between one and ten years in prison and up to million- dollar fines, depending on the gravity of the of- fense and whether they were repeat offenders.58 The French threat- ened ordinary infringers with punishments of three years and €300,000, escalating to five years and half a million euros for orga- The Rise of the Digital Public 331 nized criminal groups.59 In France someone who violated moral rights—a publisher, say, who omitted the author’s name—was lia- ble too.60 Civil damages of a million euros for transgressing moral rights were not unheard of.61 In 2002 the UK increased criminal penalties for copyright infringement from a maximum of two years’ imprisonment to ten, the same as for assault and other vio- lent crimes.62 But if rights holders were robustly asserting their claims, the pub- lic had also become more truculent. The content industries’ extreme position was met by the audience’s equally uncompromising insis- tence that digitality had changed the rules. As in the eighteenth cen- tury, piracy became a political issue. Whether on Canal Street in New York or in Chungking Mansions in Hong Kong, conventional intel- lectual property pirates still plied their trade, peddling bootleg CDs and DVDs and seeking nothing loftier than a slice of someone else’s pie. The real danger for rights holders lay elsewhere, with the novel breed of do-i t-y ourself pirate. Peer-t o-p eer networks allowed every- one to be their own pirate, heaping their plates at the celestial juke- box’s ever- expanding smorgasbord of content.63 With past technologies even pirated reproduction required some investment and thus a profit incentive. But in the digital age other motives predominated. The average pirate might well be a teenager whose musical appetites exceeded his disposable income. But other downloaders were ideologically motivated buccaneers who fought for a higher cause. Aaron Swartz, the first open access martyr, who committed suicide in 2013 when threatened with prosecution, sought to release JSTOR, the storehouse of Anglophone social science peri- odicals, to those outside academia’s digital walls. In the nineteenth century American reprint publishers had made a living pilfering British works while also arguing that they were enlightening a fledg- ling nation. The mercenary and the aspirational blended into a self- serving yet socially justified concoction that had left the Old World’s authors and publishers apoplectic with indignation. In much the same way, digital pirates now invoked the high moral stance of uni- versal enlightenment and accessibility, even as the result was as likely to be First World adolescents listening to Britney Spears as Kenyan field biologists reading Nature. 332 Chapter 8 At their most articulate, the political pirates dreamed of a future where creativity did not depend on property rights and economic incentives. Adam Smith had rejected copyright in the late eighteenth century. Authors, he thought, were sufficiently rewarded by their first- mover advantage in the market. Everyone had a right to copy by hand a book they owned. Printing, he insisted, “is no more than a speedy way of writing.”64 Reprinting thus did not violate the author’s rights. The modern pirates now followed the lead of laissez-f aire’s apostle. Digital reproduction and dissemination was just an even speedier way of writing. Nothing was taken from authors that they had not already lost by first publication. The English language, the French authorities sniffed, encouraged an unjustified conceptual eli- sion between “free” and “freedom.”65 Like the graffiti in Harvard’s Widener Library elevators of the mid- 1980s, pirates yearned to “Free the bound volumes.” They believed that information belonged to the people. Piracy was thus a public good, indeed as innocuous and well meant as “a type of library ser- vice.”66 Peer- to- peer networkers were hailed by fellow travelers in the universities “not as buccaneers, but as privateers—the patriots of the information age.”67 But they would not have been pirates without a less couth side too. As put by one of the founders of Pirate Bay, the Swedish peer- to- peer downloading hub, “If I want it, I take it, ’cause I can. It might be [im]moral to some people but I think it’s up to me to decide.”68 “Intellectual property is theft,” Daniel Cohen, channeling Proudhon, proclaimed in 2001 in Le Monde. He had the jejune temer- ity to draw analogies between adolescent music downloaders and the doctors supplying Third World AIDS victims with cheap generic medicines.69 IN THE IVORY TOWER The American legal professoriate also broadly supported a pruning of strong intellectual property rights. Eldred, the 2003 Supreme Court case that challenged seventy- year terms for existing works, revealed widespread sympathy for curbing copyright’s relentless extension. The vehemence of the American battle surprised Europe, where simi- The Rise of the Digital Public 333 lar opinion was found only at the fringes of the legal profession.70 On the whole, university-b ased jurists favored reform of overly expansive protection. An upholder of strong copyright found herself discon- certedly the defender of a fallen faith among her colleagues.71 Within the reform consensus moderates worried at the content industries’ claims to overly strong protection, feared a consequent stifling of culture and debate, and hoped to expand fair use exceptions in the digital age.72 We should counter the authors’ private property rheto- ric with similar claims in favor of the public domain, some sug- gested.73 Others drew postmodernism’s logical consequence to con- sider the public a coauthor of all works and thus entitled to its own copyright alongside the author’s.74 The most vehement jurists re- jected moral rights and other strong authorial claims altogether as an unjustified power grab.75 Upstanding members of the professoriate advocated civil disobe- dience against “increasingly unjust” copyright laws that left citizens “no choice but to disobey.”76 Law professors, whose deans probably thought they were paid to worry about more pedestrian matters, is- sued pronouncements to the effect that, “In the post- literate millen- nium . . . technology finally will sweep away all resistance to mean- ing, and all constraints beyond the individual.”77 Or, they suggested, the public domain was “a place like home, where, when you go there, they have to take you in and let you dance.”78 The law facul- ties (where some members were retooled humanities PhDs, refu- gees from the academic downturn of the 1980s and ’90s and where the journals are edited by freshly-m inted BAs) were heavily influ- enced by literary theories from English and comparative literature departments.79 Such interests meant that, cheek by jowl with the usual fare on, say, “Implications of the Precautionary Principle for Environmental Regulation in the United States,” the law journals now also carried learned disquisitions on “Romans, Roads, and Ro- mantic Creators.”80 The consensus in America’s law schools was that copyright had overreached to damage the public sphere. Even moderates, who fa- vored something less than wide- open access, did not simply defend authorial rights. Starting in the 1990s, as we have seen, the law and economics theorists advanced arguments for strengthened copyright 334 Chapter 8 based on considerations of public interest. For all their faith in prop- erty rights and the market, this still distinguished them from the continental ideology of absolute ownership for creators. Their aim was a balance between author and audience. By weakening incen- tives, they claimed, in the long run open access would diminish the public domain. Other moderates agreed with copyright’s critics that fair use must be upheld, especially for transformative new pro- duction. But they were skeptical of the most far- reaching postmod- ernist claims for a new division of labor between audience and au- thor. They questioned whether most of the digital audience was actively engaged with the work, and they remained unpersuaded by the digiterati’s arguments that the average consumer deserved full, free access.81 AND ON THE DIGITAL STREET Influential as such debates were in New Haven, Madison, Berkeley, and the other ivory tower exurbias, rumblings could also be heard on the digital street—in the chat rooms, the blogs, and the flamed- out e- manifestos—and sometimes even in the traditional media. For the first time since the nineteenth century, the American public intervened directly in debates over copyright. By 1995, when the law professor James Boyle sounded the alarm in the Washington Times about the Clinton administration’s intentions to strengthen intel- lectual property rights, a grassroots movement was organizing to defend the public domain. It was a broad church. Digital anarchists proclaimed the internet a new extragovernmental dimension, a haven in the electronic ether, offshore from everywhere. At the wa- tering hole of the über- connected in Davos, Barlow declared cyber- space’s independence in 1996. Legal concepts of property, he an- nounced, had no purchase there. “In our world, whatever the human mind may create can be reproduced and distributed infi- nitely at no cost. The global conveyance of thought no longer re- quires your factories to accomplish.”82 Digital guerillas went beyond mere exit, threatening to fight fire with fire. As we have seen in chapter 7, much of the debate in the late The Rise of the Digital Public 335 1990s over the Digital Millennium Copyright Act concerned digital rights management and protective technologies. Would the technical shut- in of content, reinforced by laws against picking digital locks, allow rights owners to sidestep fair use, first sale, and other limita- tions of authorial rights, leading to a pay- per- view world? Most mod- erate critics of the Clinton administration sought to ensure contin- ued respect for traditional exceptions, thus restricting the role of protective technologies. More radical opponents, in contrast, saw such devices as the very tools they themselves could use to fight con- tent owners’ overweening ambitions. So- called cypherpunks turned protective technologies back on themselves. Let’s equip all users with unbreakable encryption and snatch back privacy from the authori- ties’ surveillance! Trackless in the net, encrypted citizens would re- gain the anonymity of the predigital world. Electronic drivers’ li- censes could be verified without revealing their holders’ name. Digital cash left no traces.83 The most extreme cryptoanarchists simply accepted that iron- clad encryption protected both criminal and citizen. They predicted a new age of governments stymied by high tech privacy and corpora- tions gutted of trade secrets by insouciantly untraceable whistle- blowers. The same technological protective mechanisms that had marred the DMCA in the eyes of open access activists were now, in hacker hands, to create a liquid and open market for digital data.84 Sheer transparency would, paradoxically, emerge from impenetrable secrecy. Hackers orchestrated attacks on enforcers of antipiracy mea- sures. In 2010 Operation Payback targeted not just American organi- zations, like the Motion Picture and Recording Industry Associa- tions, but also the British Phonographic Institute, the Australian Federation against Copyright Theft, the Stichting Bescherming Rechten Entertainment Industrie Nederland, and AiPlex Software, an Indian firm contracted by Bollywood to take down the Pirate Bay peer- to- peer site. The 2010 Wikileaks and 2013 National Security Ad- ministration data disclosures showed that governments were only as reliable as their least-p aid employees with top-s ecurity clearance. The cyberanarchists were furious at big media. The Operation Pay- back hackers sought to liberate content from its owners, distributing it to those who otherwise had to pay for access. They saw themselves 336 Chapter 8 as fighting “extremist capitalism,” which locked up the knowledge that was humanity’s birthright. “All should have the right to listen to that beat, experience that twist in a plot, or learn from the mass vol- umes of literature now made available.”85 The digital street was no pushover. Much as the faux bohemians of Silicon Valley might plead their alternative values and commitment to free- flowing informa- tion, the street eyed them warily. Like Hollywood’s content hogs, these cyberlords’ claims to control data conflicted “with the informa- tion freedoms sought by the vast majority of information users”—to use, share, and modify it.86 The digital downloaders followed the hacker shock troops. As mil- lions of them soaked up data at the peer-t o- peer downloading sites, they threatened to bleed the content industries dry—not just to top up their MP3 players for free but also in the name of higher princi- ples. The cast of pirates, thieves, civil disobedients, and anarchists; the blurring of goals, tactics, and principle; and the unapologetic coexis- tence of ethical ambition and mercenary gain: all this made fighting the activists fiendishly difficult. Since downloading was committed largely at home, detecting, prosecuting, and convicting meant violat- ing privacy.87 What seemed to most people like normal private activ- ity—browsing, downloading, mailing friends—proved to be infring- ing. Governments, in turn, were forced into an unpalatable choice between protection and privacy. Why, the Swedish Pirate Party de- manded to know, should the authorities paw through downloads and e-m ails when letters were sacrosanct?88 BORN DIGITAL The ideological clash between open access enthusiasts and rights owners was reinforced by a generational divide. The born- digital generation simply refused to regard content as anything like conven- tional property. Absent police- state methods democracies could not enforce laws that were broadly out of tune with social mores. “A law deliberately disobeyed is demoralizing, and must either be enforced or repealed,” the Edinburgh Review had insisted in 1878, discussing copyright reform. A good law, a French deputy echoed over a century The Rise of the Digital Public 337 later, is one that is accepted and not imposed.89 Piracy remained il- legal. But was it still immoral? The digitally native generation—the internauts—was accustomed to ubiquitous broadband accessibility and approached infringement and piracy in a new spirit.90 Content should be both free and costless, demanded a cohort—generation gratis—that had suckled at the web’s informational teat and was puzzled that it could be otherwise.91 Ever fewer citizens believed that digital piracy was a serious crime. Forty million Americans downloaded illegally per year. The number of illegal file sharers in France at any given time was estimated at 4.6 million. Fifty percent of Europeans surveyed did not feel guilty about illegal downloads.92 The 2011 Hargreaves report in the UK despair- ingly noted that existing legislation was not fit for purpose if mil- lions of Englishmen were in daily breach of copyright simply for shifting works from one device to another. French magistrates pon- dered the sense of punishing young violators who barely recognized the criminality of their actions.93 Generational tensions were laid bare when the aptly named So- cialist senator Serge Lagauche in France grumbled that the habits of the young harmed creators. The net was their “far west,” as the French call the American Wild West.94 President Sarkozy spoke darkly of the demagogy and “youthism” (jeunisme) of the debates over download- ing.95 His administration paternalistically regarded France’s epidemic of downloading as a “childhood disease of the net,” which the law would soon cure. The young seemed to prefer the net as an anarchic jumble, the French minister of culture complained, rather than pro- tecting the rights of all—authors as well as their fans.96 In 2012 Emily White, a young intern at National Public Radio, provoked outrage among authors and her older listeners in America by admitting she had a downloaded library of 11,000 songs, despite having bought only fifteen CDs.97 The public increasingly assumed that anything found on the web should be theirs for free, the European Commission noted in 1995, fretting at the implications for rights holders of this growing sense of entitlement.98 During the nineteenth century Americans had found it politically impossible to impose copyright on foreign books. Now it was becoming similarly difficult to enforce old- fashioned 338 Chapter 8 strictures on the new digital cornucopia.99 Should forty million Americans be punished for downloading? Well, forty million speed- ing tickets were issued annually. Few argued that traffic rules were irrelevant, outmoded, or unenforceable.100 Certainly President Sar- kozy knew his mind about ubiquitous downloading, ironically ask- ing whether France should also legalize assassination just because murder had become widespread.101 If downloading was becoming ever less a crime, plagiarism, too, was increasingly seen as a mere peccadillo. Redubbed as intertextual mixing, plagiarism was granted absolution by prominent thinkers as diverse as the postmodernist literary critic Stanley Fish and the econ- omistic social scientist and judge Richard Posner.102 Raised in an ethos of expansive appropriation, secondary school and university students’ conception of plagiarism was becoming hazy.103 Plagiarism, piracy, and downloading increasingly intertwined into an emergent ethos that regarded the web as a candy store of content, free for the helping.104 Teen novelists, like Helene Hegemann in Germany, be- came literary sensations with books that were heavily borrowed.105 With plagiarism digitality cut two ways. It facilitated appropria- tion but also its discovery. If the young literati borrowed others’ con- tent, so too did the politicians. A startling number of prominent Europeans have recently been caught in flagrante. In 2011 the Ger- man defense minister Karl- Theodor zu Guttenberg resigned when much of his dissertation turned out to have been plagiarized. So did the German education minister, Annette Schavan, two years later. Among the many others caught having plagiarized their way to the coveted Doktortitel were the Hungarian and Romanian prime minis- ters, the Romanian education minister, and the culture minister of Lower Saxony.106 Entire websites were now devoted to uncovering plagiarism in German dissertations.107 THE EUROPEAN DEBATE SPUTTERS TO LIFE Until recently, the most heated debates over open access, freedom of the net, open source software, thick copyright protection, and the claims of the public interest have been Anglophone and largely The Rise of the Digital Public 339 American. At the turn of the millennium, the single largest group defending the public domain were American academics.108 We saw in the previous chapter that during the 1990s the Clinton administra- tion began cheerleading for strong intellectual property protection. This radical policy shift away from America’s native copyright tradi- tion helps explain why the reaction against the Berne ideology was also especially American. The US content industries naturally wel- comed, and even initiated, America’s Berne- like reforms. But in doing so they upended what had been the founding principles of the American approach since the early nineteenth century. Copyright’s public purpose was once the focus of American discussions.109 When that changed with the globalization of the Berne ideology in the 1990s, debates flared up again in the United States. By comparison, the European discussion was disjointed and slow, taking off only in the new millennium. The 1998 DMCA’s proposals for technical protection of content aroused heated dispute in the US. The equivalent impositions in the EU after 2001, with the Informa- tion Society Directive, were received largely in silence.110 The early Continental literature on authors’ rights in the digital age typically compiled Anglophone writings, outfitting them with introductions to orient a European audience.111 In Germany one critic dated the start of domestic debate from 2002.112 Two years later another com- mentator reported that discussion of the public domain was no lon- ger only an American phenomenon.113 But the same year a Swedish observer noted the American domination of the debate and the Eu- ropeans’ curious absence.114 In 2004 an otherwise well- informed Eu- ropean critic puzzled at the “move afoot in the US which does not hesitate to throw into doubt the necessity of strong copyright protec- tion.”115 The European establishment—authors, content industries, government authorities, jurists—lined up largely in unison behind the Berne position, defending strong protection for authors and rights holders. Since the Continental ideology obscured the distinc- tion between authors and rights owners, corporate disseminators basked in the goodwill generated by Europe’s supportive attitude toward authors’ claims to thick protection. While their American colleagues let the fur fly in favor of broad- ened access, the European legal professoriate generally welcomed 340 Chapter 8 how the international treaties strengthened property claims.116 The EU’s protection of rights holders was sometimes mildly criticized. One nonofficial report noted the EU’s assumptions that strong pro- tection stimulated investment and creativity and worried lest the bal- ance between owners and users go askew.117 But on the whole Euro- pean jurists firmly supported authors’ property rights. One study lauded Germany for restricting fair use to a few especially needy cases—and then making them pay anyway.118 No need for new regu- lations on authorship for digital or multimedia works—or so went a typical expression of the European consensus; no need to reform authors’ rights just because technology had changed.119 The aim of the Continental systems was to ensure the author’s rights, not to bal- ance between him and the public.120 In the United States many voices resisted thick protection: digital anarchists, librarians, researchers, law professors, and Silicon Valley’s magnates. But in Europe the main opposition was heard from shrill and narrow, single-i ssue pirate parties that arose to fight only this battle. The people spoke, even if the establishment did not. With little debate among bien- pensant opinion, dissent was forced to the extremes. A French Senate report of 2008 exemplified the authorities’ bias on downloading and thus the inflexible attitude that faced the European pirates. In its Manichean view authors and rights holders who favored “civilized” relations on the internet opposed supporters of absolute freedom. For these open access activists, it claimed, soci- ety’s rules did not apply to the web, and they sought to convince the young that “pillaging the fruits of others’ talent and work” was “an almost sacred right.”121 When the nation’s (indirectly) elected repre- sentatives took so unabashedly partisan an approach, it is no surprise that the opposition was driven to drastic measures. THE RISE OF THE PIRATES And so, Europe’s pirates set sail. The European pirate parties were a subculture venturing into politics. Technologically they were digital, politically anarcho- communist, socially lumpen bourgeois, and aes- thetically avant-g ardistic, urban, and aristocratic. Their music was the The Rise of the Digital Public 341 techno- pop that flourished in the Eurovision Song Contest au- dioshed. Their peers were the social movements—feminist, eco, gay. Their prophets were the French psycho- philosophical duo, Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari.122 Their denizens inhabited what they saw as an independent technosphere, the internet-a s- universe. The technical realities of the net, Christopher Lauer, cultural policy spokesman for the Berlin Pirate Party, insisted, “For us they are like laws of nature.”123 Pirates flourished in Scandinavia and Germany but not in the United States or elsewhere in Europe. The reasons go beyond copy- right. During the 1990s a No- Copyright Party campaigned in the US against the Bono term extension, only to evaporate later.124 Its fate was that of most novel political actors in established two- party sys- tems. New contenders find two- party systems hard to crack. Multi- party democracies, in contrast, especially if they have proportional representation and low voting thresholds to entry, are easier. The UK—which is now at least a two-a nd- a- half- party system—also had no pirate party worth mentioning. But, then again, nor did France.125 In two-p arty systems the existing organizations have to accommo- date novel opinions, and integrating new social forces generally takes place at the party level. In multiparty systems, however, new issues often lead to new parties. The radicality and fringiness of the Swed- ish and German pirate parties testified to the established institutions’ unwillingness to be accommodating. While not notorious scofflaws, the Swedes nonetheless led the way. Their Pirate Party (Piratpartiet) was founded in 2006. It was widely noticed when, in May that year, the police raided the Pirate Bay, a file- sharing site associated with it. The Pirates took a radically consumerist approach. Their 2010 election manifesto argued that, thanks to the internet, culture was infinitely available and no longer governed from above. All noncommercial downloading, use, refine- ment, and distribution of content should be legal.126 Earlier, pirates had skulked in the interstices of the internet. Their low profile im- plicitly acknowledged that many regarded their activities as illicit or immoral. Now the Pirate Party made no bones about its objectives: “We think that pirate copying is a positive force that should be en- couraged in all ways. We don’t give a shit what happens to the record- 342 Chapter 8 ing industry.”127 In 2009 the party won 7 percent of the vote in the Swedish European parliamentary elections, campaigning largely on a platform of refusing to pay for downloads. Taking advantage of the dethroning of Lutheranism as the official Swedish state religion in 2000, the Church of Kopimism registered in 2012 as a religion. Kopi- mism (pronounced “copy-m e- ism”) theologized piracy, made file copying a sacrament, proclaimed originality an illusion, and insisted that the world is built on copies.128 A Berlin Pirate Party, founded shortly after the Swedish one in 2006, captured almost 9 percent of the vote and fifteen seats in the local legislature in September 2011. During the spring of 2012, similar victories followed in other German states. Berlin’s unique polito- sphere was a pirate haven. Imagine a city of three million made up of equal parts East Village, Foggy Bottom, and downtown Detroit, combining bohemians, lumpen bourgeoisie, civil servants, and the ex- DDR unemployed, alongside a large and largely unassimilated Turkish community, all simmering in a sociologically unique metro- politan stew. Unsurprisingly, this anarchist party thrived. Its platform went well beyond the Swedes’ narrow download agenda. Besides being for pri- vacy, against copyright, and outraged by the prosecution of down- loaders, the Berlin Pirates advocated civil unions for threesomes and considered gender a private matter not to be recorded on census forms (since it might change). They were against prohibiting danger- ous dog breeds, charging for public transportation, and banning first- person shooter video games. They wished to nationalize water and electricity and extend the vote to fourteen- year- olds and foreigners. They believed in direct internet democracy. Liquid Feedback, an elec- tronic plebiscite that continuously sampled opinions, weighing them algorithmically, promised unmediated popular decision mak- ing. The Pirates dismissed the Greens, aging spokesmen of the ecol- ogy movement, as an establishment party.129 Not surprising for a con- stituency of techno- nerds, most members were men.130 Naturally rights owners, the content industries, and the right- of- center parties in northern Europe were outraged at the pirates’ at- tempts to justify digital theft as a blow for the public interest. But the formerly anti- establishment left, which saw itself as the natural de- The Rise of the Digital Public 343 fenders of authors and creativity more generally, was equally hostile to these new provocative upstarts. European bien-p ensant opinion spoke for an older generation, still firmly in the saddle. Aging 68’ers reluctant to acknowledge that they were no longer the young rebels, they approached the web gingerly. They viewed the net through the lenses of Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer’s 1930s critique of mass culture and suspected it was a mere technological sizzle with nefarious implications for high culture and civil society. Worse, it was an avenue down which the American media corporations could drive the tanks of globalization and cultural homogenization. The internet conveyed “un mode de pensée américain.”131 In 2006 Ger- many’s most influential philosopher, Jürgen Habermas, issued a par- tial benediction, conceding that the internet might have positive democratic effects. But even so, caution was the watchword. Only in authoritarian regimes, he thought, was it a force for good, as it un- dermined censorship. In liberal democracies it balkanized the citi- zenry into isolated publics, each in its own chat room fighting its parochial issues.132 Despite their Marxist posturing, the European postwar cultural elites remained very traditional in their high- culture, print- based at- titudes and their suspicion of mass media and pop culture as Trojan horses for American vulgarity. In the 1960s and ’70s they had vigor- ously opposed Broadway musicals, pop records, comics and cartoons, Hollywood, theme parks, and mass tourism. Now, with practiced ease they transferred such views to the internet. The internet, they railed, was “full of profoundly anti-h umanist values, shot through with the specter of the death of the human being.”133 Starting in 2009, over two thousand of the great and the good among traditionally minded German authors and scholars signed the Heidelberg Appeal. This petition (not to be confused with the anti- global- warming declaration of the same name) was a cri de cœur of prominent humanities and social science professors and writers against what they regarded as their two worst enemies: digital down- loaders and the hard science establishment. Google and YouTube were stealing works with impunity, they complained. Worse, the sci- entific research organizations dared to insist that works be published in broadly accessible formats. The authorities should step in to pro- 344 Chapter 8 tect authors’ rights against the American pirates and the dangerously modernizing science establishment.134 Typically beholden to parties of the left and self-p rofessedly eager to welcome new entrants in pur- suit of egalitarianism and democracy, European intellectuals and art- ists of a certain age nonetheless discovered that they did not actually favor free downloads. Why did downloaders not go to the baker and demand bread for free, railed Hans Magnus Enzensberger, aging lion of the left. “Why does it have to be against us, the authors?”135 “Steal- ing is not socialism,” insisted his Swedish pendant, Jan Guillou, de- tective fiction author, former Maoist, and KGB informant, shaking his fist at the downloaders.136 Into this vacuum left by Europe’s elders stepped the internauts and the pirates. They agreed with their parents that mass media could be centralizing, pacifying, and undemocratic. The net could be too. But the web 2.0, with its feedback and participation, was differ- ent and might encourage a Habermassian global civil society.137 As a French deputy put it in 2006, the internauts were inventing a new form of democracy, one that would radically change relations be- tween politics and citizens.138 The pirates did not suffer from what the Germans call Berührungsangst, a fear of contact with the web. They embraced it—warts and all—as unavoidably part of the future. With their anarchic proclivities the pirates were more “American” than the Continent’s classic left. As a “chaotic band of cyber- hippies,” they provided a European pendant to what has been called the Cali- fornian ideology of the web.139 French skeptics detected an unholy alliance of leftists and neoconservative hyperliberals, the first hoping to bring down the market altogether, the second to scour away its encrustations in a fit of creative destruction.140 Both groups—Prenz- lauer Berg and Silicon Valley—amalgamated new-l eft egalitarian, emancipatory, and reformist goals with a libertarian and antigovern- ment stance that traditional European thinkers were forced by their cognitive blinders to interpret as a new- right ideology.141 To illustrate the Atlantic divide most sharply: in Sweden it was left to the Pirate Party—a gaggle of ill- mannered young hackers whose vainglorious political pretensions masked their one-p lank concern for discount downloading—to argue that culture and knowledge were public goods whose value increased the more they were shared. The Rise of the Digital Public 345 Alone among Swedes, they saw that the internet could found the greatest public library ever.142 In the United States it was Google—a major corporation valued at almost five times General Motors— whose Books Project set about putting such ideas into practice, de- spite the best efforts of the European cultural establishment to thwart this new Alexandrian library, free to all. EUROPE JOINS THE FIGHT During the 1990s the ideology of strong intellectual property rights had prevailed worldwide, with the WIPO Copyright Treaty and the TRIPs agreement, the DMCA, the EU Information Society Directive, and term extensions in Europe and then the United States. The Berne doctrine of thick protection for authors and their assignees carried the day, though with moral rights held to a minimum. This was busi- ness as usual in Europe. But for Britain and especially for America, the balance had tipped too far in the direction of rights holders. During the new century’s first decade, the pendulum slowly began to swing back. In the US resistance flared up against the content in- dustries’ overreaching ambitions. We have already touched on the bills seeking to temper the DMCA’s worst aspects and the fights over the SOPA and PIPA bills in 2012. In 1999 content owners had also run into resistance when the recording industry’s trade association, the RIAA, successfully lobbied Congress to amend the definition of work- for- hire to include sound recordings. Without debate, record- ing artists thus found themselves stripped of their ability to termi- nate assignment of rights after thirty- five years. This had been a loop- hole allowing freelancers to renegotiate terms if they thought they could get a better deal for works that had, after thirty- five years, proven to be unexpectedly popular and profitable. When it became clear that the recording industry was surreptitiously trying to expro- priate its artists, the protest was so vehement that the amendment was quickly repealed.143 Having passed the 1990s in silence, Europe now too finally joined the digital debates. In the new millennium the Continent moved from nary a murmur of dissent to an even more polarized confronta- 346 Chapter 8 tion than in the United States. Authors’ rights defenders in the estab- lishment confronted tattooed digiterati at their laptops. It no longer sufficed simply to pronounce that authors deserved protection, as always, and that new technologies were no cause for change. In the 1990s it had pained many Americans to lengthen terms yet again, to trim fair use, and to expand protection for rights holders. Now the Continental ideology too came under strain. The generational shift in expectations, expressed through the pirate parties, could no longer be ignored. Received opinion gradually acknowledged that the An- glophone copyright tradition did not just do the content industries’ bidding but also defended an expansive public domain. Early in the new millennium some European intellectuals began arguing that Continental law had perhaps become overprotective of authors.144 Even the innately conservative legal profession in Europe began to thaw. A new generation of Continental jurists slowly adopted atti- tudes akin to the Anglo-S axon. Unimaginably to Anglophone jurists, older French lawyers still insisted that authors’ rights should be per- petual.145 But younger ones began to suspect that protection had been extended too far. Perhaps a happy synthesis of the copyright and authors’ rights traditions could be achieved.146 Careful not to identify themselves as activists, several scholars associated with the Max Planck Institute for Intellectual Property and Competition Law in Munich—an important hatchery for reform ideas within the EU—published a declaration in 2008, arguing for a more balanced interpretation of Berne’s three-s tep rule. As we have seen, this rule tightly limited fair use exceptions. By definition fair use was not al- lowed to harm the author’s property rights. The 2008 Planck declara- tion now took issue with this.147 Embracing the classic Anglo- American copyright logic of balancing interests among authors, disseminators, and audience, it supported exceptions as important tools to safeguard the public’s concerns. And it broke with a core principle of the Continental ideology that—like any other owner— the author deserved whatever rewards the market offered. Instead, the Planck declaration now argued, below- market payments were justified when required by public (“third- party”) interests “as long as there are sufficient incentives for the continued creation and dissemi- nation of works.” This was not the inherent logic of property but that of the public interest finally peeping through. The Rise of the Digital Public 347 In a similar spirit the Wittem Project, initiated in the Netherlands in 2010, brought together European jurists to advocate reform of the opaque EU process of legislating on authors’ rights. These lawyers explicitly sought to combine principles from both the authors’ rights and copyright traditions, both natural rights and utilitarianism.148 The Anglo- Saxon influence showed up in their critique of the closed European approach to fair use exceptions. In addition to an explicit catalog of exceptions, Wittem offered an opening clause that ex- tended their scope. Though careful to explain that they were not pro- posing “mere” fair use on the American model “without any guide- lines,” they were clearly impatient with the EU 2001 Information Society Directive’s list of specific enumerated exceptions, which no member nation could expand.149 Also notable was Wittem’s dethron- ing of moral rights, otherwise the holy grail of the Continental ideol- ogy. If moral rights threatened to harm the disseminators’ legitimate interests, they should not be enforced. Nor should they be imple- mented if they impeded the public’s interests—for example, in facili- tating access to the work. The author could waive his moral rights, and they could be curtailed after his death. Other observers dared to suggest that perhaps moral rights should be more flexible for digital works on the web.150 In other respects, too, Berne’s traditional priority for rights hold- ers was questioned, though it was not yet changed in practice. The Berlin Declaration was spearheaded in 2003 by the Max Planck Soci- ety, German’s primary scientific research institution (of which the intellectual property institute mentioned above was only one of some eighty branches). The Planck Society now advocated open ac- cess for state- financed research. It was such initiatives that had prompted more old-f ashioned colleagues in the humanities and so- cial sciences to sign the Heidelberg Appeal in protest. The Berlin Declaration’s aim was to break the pricing monopoly of the science periodical publishers.151 Recent European court cases have also signaled an approach less beholden to the supremacy of authors’ exclusive claims and even their moral rights.152 As we have seen, in 2007 Victor Hugo’s heirs ultimately failed to persuade the French courts to block sequels to Les Misérables, first published in 1862. Two polarized cases revealed the continuing tensions in German law—but also a possible shift in 348 Chapter 8 favor of the audience. In 1998 a Munich court found for the estate of Erich Kästner, author of Emil and the Detectives. It ruled that the Holly wood movie It Takes Two (1995) violated his 1949 novel, Das dop- pelte Lottchen, since both were about identical- looking nine- year- old girls who befriended each other and brought two adults together (in one case divorced parents, in the other a caretaker and a widowed father).153 The author thus won purchase on something more than just his expression, indeed on something close to the idea of his story. The court also dismissed the differences between the two works as largely the effect of typically American entertainment movies and their exaggerated narrative techniques. The core of the protected work was declared to be the solid German novel (though actually Kästner’s work had first seen life as a screenplay during the Third Reich).154 If the court here strengthened the traditional authors’ rights, a new precedent quickly followed. In 2000 the descendants of two lit- erary lions of the left, Heiner Müller and Bertolt Brecht, squared off.155 Müller’s play, Germania 3: Gespenster am toten Mann, collaged together large chunks of two Brecht pieces. When accused in 1930 of importing many verses of François Villon’s poetry into his Three- penny Opera, Brecht himself had declared copyright to be medieval and superseded.156 His less lofty heirs were known, however, for keep- ing interpreters on a short leash.157 When they sued Müller’s estate, the Supreme Court ruled that, since Brecht was a character in Ger- mania 3, Müller had a right to quote him at length. Once published, the court lectured the plaintiffs, a work no longer belonged exclu- sively to its author. It joined society’s common cultural heritage. Art- ists had to tolerate other creators making incursions into their autho- rial rights.158 FRANCE HAS ITS MACAULAY MOMENT Even in the digital era France self- consciously remained the main defender of the Continental ideology. Around the turn of the millen- nium, this French self- image became intertwined with a broader sense of the nation’s own cultural exceptionalism. Partly reacting to The Rise of the Digital Public 349 the growing dominance of the English language, the French also resisted including intellectual property in the global trade system. They rejected what they saw as the Anglo-S axon commodification of culture, seeking instead to exempt it from the WTO’s liberalization of international trade.159 Late in the 1990s the French shorthand for the battle against Anglophone dominance gradually morphed from “cultural exceptionalism” to “cultural diversity.”160 Rather than set- ting up France as the only exception to the English- language hege- mon, the French now implicitly accepted other cultures and lan- guages as allies in their quest to beat back the Ango-S axons. As a slogan “diversity” spared the French from painting themselves into their own culturally unique corner. They thus hoped for broader backing both from other Europeans and also the Third World, where French cultural exceptionalism seemed simply a parochial subvari- ant of Eurocentrism.161 The French were caught in pincers of their own making. The EU strove to harmonize the European economies, girding them for in- creasingly global competition. With its exporting content industries and ambitions to punch above its cultural weight, France had a vested stake in EU harmonization. A French commission reported in 2006 that if France aspired to best its competitors in the new global intellectual property market, then nostalgia, immobilism, and pro- tectionism must go.162 But France’s “civilizing mission” was also de- fined as defending European culture against the Anglophone barbar- ians. Globalizer or cultural exception? The two goals conflicted. Domestic French battles over how to implement the EU’s directives on authors’ rights became part of a larger Kulturkampf that set the French—and to a lesser extent the Europeans—against the rest of the world. It was in France that the most telling battles were now fought. True, the nation’s authors emerged victorious yet again. But, perhaps for the first time in French history since the revolution, the outcome was not foreordained. Battles like those of the 1990s in America over the DMCA arrived in Europe early in the new millennium. The debate was sharper and more polarized now. The French content industries and their right- of- center political allies sought to keep France exceptional by strengthening authors’ legal protection. The left- wing parties also 350 Chapter 8 supported French exceptionalism and were no fans of Anglophone capitalism either. But now they were attracted also by the egalitar- ian promise of universal access. For the first time the French left began to suspect that authors’ rights had been pushed too far. Even allowing for the rhetorical excesses of French parliamentarians, the debates were raucous and unfocused. The center- right government and its Socialist opposition swiveled from discussing flat- rate licens- ing or the price of CDs at one instant to accusations of French thralldom to American media enterprises or totalitarian ideologies the next.163 The first round in France was fought over the 2006 DADVSI law, which implemented the EU 2001 Information Society Directive.164 Media coverage was intense, spiced with public protest and com- ment. As a sop to French traditions, the government’s first initiative was to extend authors’ rights (“the personalist and liberal concept of authors’ rights à la française”) to—of all people—civil servants.165 Primarily a tactical move, these provisions were largely ignored in the debates. In any case, they were carefully crafted to be anodyne. Though accorded a disclosure right, for example, government em- ployees could invoke it only if not in conflict with their duties. Nor could they withdraw works except as authorized by their superiors. With little actually at stake, recognizing civil servants’ moral rights was largely symbolic.166 The interesting bits lay elsewhere. Much like the Clinton administration with the 1998 DMCA, the Chirac government presented its ambition as a moderate adjustment of existing law to bring authors’ rights into the digital age. Circum- venting protective technologies was to be outlawed and two new exceptions to authors’ exclusive rights were proposed: for copies made in computer memory as works moved across the internet and for works adapted for the handicapped.167 But the government also struck another blow in the trans- Atlantic cultural battle, reaffirming French traditions even in the internet era. Opponents of the draft bill wanted much more radical changes. They argued that instead of tra- ditional exclusive rights for authors, digital works should be compul- sorily licensed, allowing unlimited access for flat-r ate fees. The gov- ernment, however, insisted that digitality’s ability to track individual usage strengthened the nation’s humanistic tradition and allowed The Rise of the Digital Public 351 France to remain at odds with Anglo- Saxon copyright. The law was there to protect the author’s exclusive rights, threatened as they were by unauthorized copies and downloads.168 Unexpectedly, the parliamentary opposition in both chambers violently denounced this supposedly harmless bill for criminalizing peer- to- peer file sharing and private copying. Free access was glori- fied and the content industries vilified. Microsoft and Apple were made the whipping boys. The parties of the left—Socialists, Com- munists, and Greens—attacked protective technologies as hobbling the right to private copies and more generally as stifling open access. France, they warned, was on the verge of implementing the most restrictive measures of any EU nation.169 “It was rather odd to witness such a focus on [the] anti- copyright position in a country where the droit d’auteur is still so important,” one commentator noted.170 But that was precisely the point. In France kowtowing to authors had long trumped all other considerations. Now the audience was finally being spoken for. A century and a half later, Victor Hugo’s homeland was having the fight that, in Britain, Macaulay had picked with Tal- fourd in the 1830s. The French government was surprised that authorial rights no longer enjoyed the acquiescence it had complacently anticipated. Along with Communists and Greens—and with occasional support from defectors from the right- of- center government party, the UMP— the Socialist opposition introduced new themes to the French dis- cussion. Deputies predictably attacked the monopolistic American media and high tech corporations. Yet behind the conventional blus- ter change was afoot. The French left now hesitantly embraced ele- ments of the hated Anglo- Saxon copyright ideology.171 Compulsory licensing, normally regarded in France as undermining the author’s exclusive rights, was the solution for online works that the Socialist deputy Christian Paul advocated during the parliamentary debates. He also insisted that French law make exceptions for scholarship, teaching, and private copying modeled on the open- ended American practice of fair use.172 And as an example of how to deal with peer-t o- peer file sharing, Paul held up the US Supreme Court’s 1984 Betamax decision, which allowed potentially infringing technologies so long as they also had significant legitimate uses.173 352 Chapter 8 During the debates other Socialist deputies repeated the custom- ary mantra that French cultural exceptionalism expressed itself through authors’ rights—a venerable achievement not to be diluted into mere Anglo-S axon copyright, and so forth.174 Yet they also agreed that modern knowledge production posed new challenges. Authors’ rights were part of a social give- and- take. The idea of a balance be- tween creators and audience, formerly shunned in France as a weak- ening of authorial prerogatives, was now identified as the heart of the issue—whether that was expressed explicitly as in the United States or implicitly as in France.175 Even the most sacred of French beliefs was queried as the audience’s concerns received attention. Was it re- ally logical that the author should be protected for seventy years after his death, a centrist deputy wondered. Perhaps it was time to dare question this.176 France had traditionally restricted exceptions to au- thorial rights. Should not the allowable use of works beyond the author’s control now be expanded?177 Socialist deputies proposed a flat- rate license, allowing unlimited access to digital content for a fixed (and unrealistically low) levy on broadband subscriptions (€5 monthly was an oft- mentioned fig- ure).178 The inherited system, they argued, mainly benefitted large and usually American media and computer corporations.179 Instead of criminalizing downloading, why not allow surfers access for a regularized fee? Exceptions to authors’ exclusive rights were crucial, they continued, especially making private copies. Otherwise consum- ers’ interests—rarely a pressing concern in French debates before— would be neglected, leaving digitality’s “cultural democratization” unfulfilled.180 Yes, Macaulay could have said it better. But the gist of this new-f ound concern for the audience was much the same. The government’s supporters, however, demanded exclusive au- thorial rights. They claimed that licensing was favored by only a few performers’ organizations. Perhaps licensing worked for music. But it would choke off funding for film, which remained a jewel of French culture. Digital technologies should not be held hostage to an outmoded collectivism. Instead, each author should be rewarded precisely for usage of his work.181 Individualized tracking promised to continue a “personalist conception of the law,” calibrating reward equitably to the work’s appeal.182 The government bill corresponded The Rise of the Digital Public 353 to traditional French views, these supporters insisted. It celebrated the work, upheld France’s cultural exceptionalism, and asserted her national identity.183 The French blamed academia and the American countercultures for the notion that internet content should be gratis.184 But the French and Americans were entangled culturally in other ways too. In exceptionalist France culture was heavily regulated. The French government redistributed money from foreign to domestic authors, from blockbusters to bohemians. With its protectionist barriers and tariffs on foreign film imports, the system rested on a dirty little se- cret. French intellectuals might rail against Hollywood. But Califor- nia was the locomotive that pulled their train. The more Hollywood blockbusters packed the cinemas, the more money the French state redistributed through the Centre national du cinéma, its Vichy- era institution for promoting local movie making.185 Downloaders were thus sawing away at the limb on which the French cultural establish- ment perched. An end run around the Hollywood studios, “the ma- jors,” meant that much less money would trickle down to the minors. “Cyber gratuity” threatened to upend this carefully balanced ecosys- tem of tariffs and taxes.186 As though to cap a debate whose opening salvo had been fired two centuries earlier, both sides in the National Assembly and Senate reached back to the French Revolution. To reinforce its claim to be carrying on French exceptionalism, the right- of- center government quoted le Chapelier’s hoary insistence from 1791 that no property was as sacred, legitimate, and personal as work springing from the author’s mind.187 The leftist opposition invoked his oft- ignored sub- sequent argument that, having published his work, the author had in effect given it away. The only rights he retained were those society granted him.188 The classic tension between audience and author, which the Continent had largely resolved during the nineteenth cen- tury in favor of creators, returned here in full force to the center of debate. But with a center- right majority in the French Assembly, even ve- hement debate did not prevent the outcome in 2006 from toeing the traditional line. Governmental maneuvering eliminated an amend- ment in favor of flat-r ate licensing. Instead, the author was allowed 354 Chapter 8 to choose his means of remuneration and distribution. As the gov- ernment spokesman trumpeted, the author was back at the center of events.189 But the opposition had also left its mark. The government now at least spoke of achieving a balance between internet down- loaders and authors.190 Punishments were moderated. A graduated response to infringement (warnings followed by disruption of inter- net access) served as an alternative to more draconian penal sanc- tions. Personal, noncommercial downloads would no longer mean prison. But when the Constitutional Council later ruled that even personal downloads infringed and were punishable by up to three years in jail and fines of €300,000, the graduated response approach failed for the moment. French audiences also benefited when this new DADVSI law, which passed in 2006, mandated that digital works should be in- teroperable across proprietary and incompatible formats. Interoper- ability appealed to the opposition’s conversion to free-a ccess princi- ples. It also conveniently allowed left- of- center deputies to play to their core constituencies by fulminating against American media corporations. In effect, the hope was to force Apple to open its oth- erwise incompatible iPod format.191 “Interoperability is the republic in digitality,” argued Christian Paul, the tireless and often tiresome Socialist advocate for free access. It counteracted informational clan- nishness.192 The right- leaning UMP government party agreed, and interoperability was adopted at its deputies’ behest. Nonetheless, it did not meet a happy fate.193 First the Senate watered down its provi- sions. Then the Constitutional Council struck out the exemption for interoperability altogether as too vague.194 In the end the law banned circumventing technological protection for commercial purposes, thus implicitly exempting private users. But it also created a new criminal offense of supplying software for unauthorized access to works—file sharing—punishable by up to three years in jail and fines of €300,000.195 Despite such newfound support for the audience mustered on the parliamentary left, the DADVSI law in fact bolstered authors by pun- ishing downloading severely. Yet French youth paid little heed. As massive downloading continued, the politicians responded quickly. The French faced a dilemma. They had something worth stealing. The Rise of the Digital Public 355 Alone in Europe, the French liked to pride themselves, they had com- petitive music and film industries.196 At 2.5 percent of GDP, the cul- ture business was larger than in most comparable economies.197 And content was easy to steal. Blessed with widespread and cheap broad- band, French downloaders found piracy convenient and tempting. With important content industries and avid downloaders, French politicians were squeezed between two demanding constituencies. French internauts spent twice as much time illegally downloading as their American, British, or German peers.198 Nearly 94 percent of re- cently released films were available on peer- to- peer networks before they appeared on DVD.199 At the same time, the French public shunned dematerialized products.200 Digital sales made up a quarter of the American market, but only 7 percent in France.201 Veneration of the author was a national tradition. But the young demanded wide- spread access and were helping themselves to what they wanted. Now the political left eagerly catered to their consumerist populism. Sarkozy’s wife, Carla Bruni, a recording artist, spoke out for strict enforcement of intellectual property rights during his presidential campaign. Soon after his victory, in November 2007, a deal was bro- kered—the Elysée Agreement—between content producers and in- ternet providers. Denis Olivennes, its shepherd, was a less than im- partial outsider. Former lover of the presidential spouse, he also headed FNAC, the largest French retailer of books, media, and elec- tronics.202 Brandishing both carrots and sticks, the agreement gave voice to French officialdom’s realization, born of the DADVSI de- bates, that the public could not be banned from unauthorized down- loading without also being given a chance to pay for digital works. The Elysée signatories promised consumer-f riendly digital works without noisome protective technologies. Music producers agreed to remove technical restrictions from French works; the movie industry promised to quicken the schedule by which films could be down- loaded legally after their theatrical release.203 Merely an agreement, the Elysée accords still needed backing in statute. A year later, in 2008, the authorities drafted a bill to impede unauthorized downloading.204 The Sarkozy government’s core prin- ciple was that each author, performer, and producer be paid in the usual way for his work. There would be no “far west” fantasies of a 356 Chapter 8 lawless internet. France must resist the “illusion and the lie that works could be costless [la gratuité].” Nor should it allow (in the words of a Senate report) “a certain ideology” to advocate the pillag- ing of cultural works.205 Enshrining cultural exceptionalism, this new law, France’s cultural minister boasted, would continue France’s long fight for authors’ rights even in the internet era.206 To police downloading, the law established an administrative au- thority, the Haute autorité pour la diffusion des œuvres et la protec- tion des droits sur internet (HADOPI). Avoiding penal sanctions, the law instead imposed graduated responses that slowed down and eventually cut off illicit downloaders’ internet connections. Such moderated punishments were meant to demonstrate official solici- tude for internauts, enticing them from their false ideology of laissez- faire and the “ultra-l iberalism of the net.” But the authorities were also determined to uphold creators’ property rights and the “person- alist” vision of authors’ rights on the internet.207 French cultural ex- ceptionalism was the nation’s pride, an element of its identity. At its core lay respect for property, especially intellectual property.208 Old ideological certainties were now partly reestablished. No par- tisan cleavages, the minister of culture insisted in 2008, undermined the grand French tradition of authors’ rights.209 Leftist deputies in the Assembly kept up the drumbeat for open access. But Socialists and Communists in the Senate vied with each other to support French cultural exceptionalism and authors’ rights. They vividly expressed their distaste for the mercantile Anglo-S axons and squelched propos- als of free access for young internauts. Cutting off downloaders’ con- nections, Socialist and Green senators insisted, violated rights no more than shutting off the phones of those who did not pay their bills.210 Communist senators sought in vain to add an amendment reaffirming traditional French values and later even pondered a mo- tion to anchor moral rights in the constitution itself.211 But in the lower house Manichean dichotomies remained. Christian Paul, the excitable Socialist deputy, asked his fellow parliamentarians to choose between the infinite possibilities of the open internet and the closed world of the status quo. Paying for content was outmoded. The old regime—false scarcity through repression—was like scoop- ing water with a butterfly net. Streaming would soon make even The Rise of the Digital Public 357 downloading obsolete, and so forth. The now familiar messianic tones of the digital visionaries sounded yet again.212 Though shrill, resistance was ineffectual. The left was hamstrung by at least three contradictory positions: its traditional veneration of authors (shared with the right) and its dislike of the media industries (undermined by the government’s clever insistence that its bill would benefit local French producers more than the loathed Ameri- can multinationals). Finally, a newfound interest in consumers and the audience was spiced by a sense that the internet was democratic and emancipatory and that here might be a way of winning the in- ternauts’ votes.213 Socialists in the Senate generally supported the gov- ernment. In the Assembly the tone was raucous and oppositional. After an interminable and chaotic parliamentary passage the HADOPI law finally emerged in the spring of 2009—only to be partly quashed yet again by the Constitutional Council. The Council rejected having an administrative entity, the HADOPI, mete out se- vere punishments like cutting off internet access. To pass constitu- tional muster the government added final tweaks in yet a new law, shifting to the courts the authority to impose service cutoffs.214 Dis- sent on the left in the Assembly during these prolonged debates had revealed that even France could not sidestep digitality’s imperatives. Here, too, the audience was staking claims. Nonetheless, this cluster of laws (DADVSI, HADOPI, and the final 2009 law) reaffirmed tradi- tional French views. Digital age or not, the author remained firmly in the saddle. Outright infringement still meant punishments of up to three years and €300,000. But garden-v ariety downloaders were warned, their connections then hobbled and eventually suspended. The left’s hopes for an audience-f riendly approach with more open access and downloading at flat- rate fees went nowhere.215 Historians commit few sins worse than assuming that the recent story they narrate has ended. France’s attempts to grapple with digi- tality have not been resolved. Whatever is written here will be out- moded—no doubt by publication date. The point is that the de- bate—though not over—continues to be framed in terms that would have been entirely recognizable to Macaulay and Talfourd in the 1830s and even to Condorcet and Diderot in the 1760s. The digital age challenged even France’s singularly insistent approach to authors’ 358 Chapter 8 rights. For the first time in a century and a half, the inherited pieties of the author’s predominance were being questioned. France was fi- nally having its Macaulay moment. As in Britain in the 1830s, when Talfourd’s hopes of extending protection for works to sixty years postmortem had been beaten back by Macaulay’s eloquent defense of an expansive public domain, so in France the audience was now finally being spoken for and authorial prerogatives challenged. But, unlike in the UK and the US, Talfourd was besting Macaulay, and the French author remained ascendant—at least for now. Seen more broadly, new fronts were opening up within Europe itself. While the French were beginning to debate digitality’s im- peratives, the German authorities clamped down, refusing conces- sions. “Authors’ rights remain first and foremost the rights of au- thors,” the German cultural minister insisted in 2010. “There is no reason to loosen the law on behalf of consumers. Free access for the public cannot be achieved by changing it from protecting the cre- ative classes to serving consumers.”216 More widely still, new disputes pitted Eastern against Western Europe. Just after the SOPA and PIPA battles in the United States in 2012, when the content indus- tries were bested by consumers and new technology firms, protests flared up across Europe against the Anti- Counterfeiting Trade Agree- ment (ACTA). ACTA had been worked out in secretive circum- stances that did not endear it to internet activists, and it granted authorities disturbingly broad powers. Signed by thirty states, it sought to create an international regime for punishing counterfeit- ing and piracy. Especially the new EU nations of the former East Bloc now protested. There, Communism had scoured the cultural landscape. Credible newspapers and publishers had only recently reemerged. Coming of political age with the internet, the new Eu- ropeans had embraced the web far more enthusiastically than the older EU members. In the former East slogans of free and universal access were proclaimed on blogs and chanted in the streets. In July 2012, when the European Parliament rejected the ACTA, Easterners hailed it as their victory. The ACTA’s defeat was a rare grassroots triumph within the EU machinery. Parliament held out against the Commission, and the new nations—lacking big media businesses to influence local politi- The Rise of the Digital Public 359 cians—prevailed over Western Europe, with its powerful corporate content owners.217 The Poles especially congratulated themselves on rallying protest in the dead of winter. The Western political elites, in contrast, fretted that digital populism had run amok. The ACTA should be supported, the German cultural minister argued, because it did for Europe what German law already had accomplished at home.218 Most ACTA rules were already in European national law, Italy’s premier newspaper, the Corriere della Sera, pointed out, so re- jection at the EU level meant little. Internet activists, the Financial Times Deutschland grumbled, were lobbyists, no less than the pharma- ceutical or the energy companies. By contrast, the conservative Slove- nian paper, Večer, trumpeted that rejecting the ACTA meant “that Europe’s understanding of copyright triumphs over that of the US.”219 That, of course, was nonsense. The new fault line no longer ran only through the Atlantic. It also followed the Iron Curtain. Fully half of the few European parliamentary deputies voting in favor of the ACTA were French.220 Those opposed were young West Europeans of the internet generation and the Easterners, “who know what it is to have their freedoms curtailed and have expressed great concern about the way ACTA might be implemented,” according to David Martin, rapporteur of the proposal.221 ALEXANDRIA REBORN? GOOGLE DOES BOOKS Why these latest debates between author and audience were fought later and with different accents in Europe than in the United States can best be understood in light of the long historical trajectory out- lined here. Thanks to the lobbying of its content industries, America decided in the 1990s to adopt the Berne line. Jack Valenti trumped Thomas Jefferson. Because this was a major shift from inherited do- mestic copyright traditions, American debates were heated. The United States had responded to digitality’s challenges earlier than Europe. But global trends spared no one. Europe, too, had to face the new world. The Berne doctrine having triumphed in the 1990s, Eu- rope now discovered the difficulties of reinforcing authors’ preroga- tives in the digital age while pretending that nothing had changed. 360 Chapter 8 Since the United States had preceded Europe along the digital learning curve, American commercial interests took the lead. To be the world’s (so far) largest, most economically integrated, monolin- gual cultural market was an advantage in the network era. The logic of networks dictates that, as they add members, their value grows exponentially. A phone system with four subscribers is more than twice as good as one with only two. As the web grew and densified, America’s first-m over and scale advantages favored the half-b illion Anglophones. Worse off were Europe’s many linguistically distinct cultures, few of whom (other than the Iberians and to some little extent the French) had market depth in cultural hinterlands abroad. Back in the analog era this had merely meant being swamped by the Beatles and Clint Eastwood. But the web turbocharged the logic of networks. By ranking net surfers’ choices, Google’s algorithms re- flected the universal suffrage of the mouse click. Inevitably, English- language sites percolated to the top. Europe understandably feared being doubly swamped: not just by Anglophonia’s content but also by the very logic of the system imposing a digital Matthew Effect: giving more to those who already had plenty.222 As Europe reacted to the internet, nationalism and hostility to Americans grew. Instead of seeing the web as a global challenge for all nations, Europeans often regarded it as a particularly American threat. US media, especially Hollywood, were feared as predatory. Perhaps that was understandable. A wave of American film, TV, and music had washed over Europe ever since the 1930s, submerging local production with cheap, good- enough competition that de- lighted audiences but worried politicians and intellectuals.223 Europe had imposed elaborate protectionist restrictions already early in the twentieth century: local- content requirements for radio and TV, reg- ulation of the book and film markets, government subsidies, and the like. Bulwarks, palisades, dikes, and canals: such were the techniques Europe had employed against the Anglophone analog tsunami. But now the very tools of the internet—the search engines that increas- ingly mediated most knowledge—were tuned to reward one lan- guage, discounting the others. The threat had escalated. And when in 2004 Google proposed to recreate the Alexandrian library on a mod- ern scale by digitizing the world’s books, the possibility that Anglo- The Rise of the Digital Public 361 phone dominance would be woven into the very fabric of content delivery roused angst on the Continent. This was not the first time Europeans had reacted allergically to American plans to safeguard and disseminate culture. In the mid- 1930s Americans had proposed new photographic techniques to copy documents from European archives for research use in the United States. Inspired by Robert C. Binkley, Americans had then regarded microfilm as opening new technological vistas, comparable to Gutenberg’s invention of printing. Mass microfilming would apply Fordist methods to reproduce documents from the great European libraries. The old distinctions between published and unpublished work would be overcome. “The library,” Binkley foresaw, “may come to be, not only a depository of printed material, not only a collector of existing records, but even a maker of new records.”224 Microfilm promised to make obscure works affordably available. American scholars could gain access to European riches without having to travel. Many such themes of enhanced accessibility that we regard as particular to digitality were broached already then. Both in the 1930s and some seventy years later, the Americans presented plans to pre- serve and broaden access to European culture. But what the New World saw as the free flow of information, the Old feared as a sinister grab for treasures it preferred to keep under lock and key. Affecting a high moral tone against the Google Books project, the Europeans now claimed to speak for cultural diversity against the relentless anglicization of the world, in thrall to “the hyperpower of a dominant civilization.”225 Digitizing Anglo- American libraries, they accused, would cement the ascendance of Anglophone literature, marginalizing European culture even further.226 Google, they warned, was proffering a Faustian pact, luring Europeans with the illusion of free availability.227 Perhaps Europeans’ fears were understandable. Their answer was less so. Doing their utmost to shut down Google Books, they hobbled themselves too. In using the pretext of feared anglicization to resist Google, the Europeans were in effect universalizing their own provincialism. Google’s aim, after all, was to disseminate the already existing reper- toire. It did not seek to tilt the present balance of cultures in any particular direction. Rather than throwing up obstacles, the Conti- 362 Chapter 8 nent might have been better off rushing to participate, diluting the feared Anglophone overrepresentation.228 Instead of snarling from the sidelines, why did the Bibliothèque nationale not join with the New York Public, Chicago, and Oxford libraries, alongside the other Google partners, to share its patrimony with the world?229 The an- swer lay in Europe’s fundamental assumptions about who gained. “In Google’s attitude,” one French observer sniffed of the books proj- ect, “one recognizes the Anglo- Saxon tendency to give the advantage to public interests over those of authors.”230 The European charge of Anglophone myopia stuck only if the English- language libraries now to be digitized were as monocultural as the Continent’s. Though accurate figures are scarce, over half the holdings of repositories like Harvard’s Widener Library or the Li- brary of Congress—two of the world’s biggest—are in languages other than English. The Bibliothèque nationale claims that 60 per- cent of its books are in languages other than French. Again, figures are incomplete and approximate, but it appears that a quarter of all books published in recent years have been in English and 6 percent in French.231 Such ratios will not, of course, have held throughout the book’s long history. But with the vast increase of publishing in the last century, they will be broadly representative of the linguistic makeup of the collection that a globally representative and universal library would have acquired. With similar fractions (around half) of holdings in their native language, French books were thus four times overrepresented in the Bibliothèque nationale compared to English- language books in the Library of Congress. Books in German make up more than 12 percent of Widener’s fourteen million volumes. Once the Harvard library has been digitized, as many German books will have come on line as if the entire University of Heidelberg li- brary had been scanned. By 2010 Google had digitized twelve million volumes in six years, twenty million by 2013. Over half of the first ten million books scanned were in languages other than English.232 Where Google had pressed ahead, not asking for permission from rights holders on the assumption that fair use sufficed, the official European attempts to respond in kind were hampered by punctilious observance of au- thors’ property rights. They were therefore slow, expensive, and lim- The Rise of the Digital Public 363 ited. Gallica—founded in 1997 as the official French riposte to Google and dubbed by the French “the honest person’s virtual library”—had scanned only 145,000 books by 2010.233 The German equivalent, the Deutsche Digitale Bibliothek, got under way only in 2009. Europe- ana, the all-E urope digitization agglomerator, offered access to only some 200,000 books as of 2010.234 Even the EU recognized that Google was outstripping European efforts.235 At the rate of French digitization, another two generations would still have to trek to the libraries if they were to read at all. In the United States authors and publishers—the ones with most to lose from an expanded public domain—also resisted Google’s am- bitions. Other, disinterested objectors worried at entrusting so im- portant a public function as a universal digital library to private hands.236 Europe, in contrast, was most concerned with the threat- ened violation of private property. Besides fears of cultural marginal- ization, Europeans sought to foil the Google Books project in order to protect content owners’ claims. “Since intellectual property rights are a key tool to stimulate creativity,” the European Communities Commission insisted, “Europe’s cultural material should be digi- tised, made available and preserved,” but only “in full respect of copy- right and related rights.”237 French senators portrayed Google as an amoral enterprise with massively destructive and hegemonic intentions. Under cover of the confusion introduced by digital technology, it planned to attack and dismantle authors’ rights.238 “Placing entire books online, even if en- coded,” Jean- Noël Jeanneney, former head of the Bibliothèque natio- nale, warned, “is a dangerous game.”239 It was dangerous also because the European publishing industry was well organized and ready to fight. We have already noted its power to block or restrict significant exceptions for research, education, or the handicapped during imple- mentation of the EU Information Society Directive. European con- tent industries were also shielded from outside competition by pro- tectionist bulwarks and obligingly bolstered by corporatist pricing arrangements on the domestic market. In the United States Google, the Authors Guild, and some pub- lishers eventually arrived at a settlement in 2008. After vigorous lob- bying by US and European publishers and authors, it was rejected in 364 Chapter 8 an American court in 2011. In Europe Google achieved no settlement at the time. In France Google was sued for violating both the eco- nomic and moral rights of authors. Whatever American fair use might dictate, the court ruled, the snippets of books displayed by Google were illegal. The American concept of fair use, the French minister of culture agreed, was but a legal loophole used by Google to despoil thousands of authors of their rights.240 Yes, French law had a short quotation exemption. But Google’s brief citations did not count since, as random excerpts, they allegedly conveyed no coherent information. Moreover, the French court added, by presenting only excerpts from books (so as not to violate the author’s economic rights) and running them as a continuous banner, Google violated the moral right of integrity by distorting the work’s appearance. France also rejected Google’s claim that the publishers did not hold the rights to digital dissemination and that books were thus free to be digitized. Authors, the court insisted, had signed away their rights to any and all future uses in their publishing contracts. Curiously, these were precisely the sort of blanket waivers that European law normally rejected.241 The very act of collectivizing books in one mass database—the idea that so inspired Wired’s founder Kevin Kelly—raised French hackles. Google could rank books, formulating the algorithms that chose which ones were to be displayed and when. But this apparently demeaned “those special elements that distinguish the unique cul- tural traditions of France by turning books into merely industrial byproducts of a computer database.”242 Such French objections stemmed from a profoundly traditional approach to books as physi- cal objects. “A book cannot be reduced to information,” the French Communist senator Jack Ralite, insisted in 2009. “Libraries are not databases.” Reading on the screen, he continued, “is not reading a work in its coherence and integrity. It fragments the text and its read- ing. It disintegrates works and mutilates moral rights. . . . Google is interested in pages and not in works in their entirety.” It was absurd, he concluded—blithely oblivious to big- data research projects—to digitize all books. Two million books in the National Library had never been consulted. Why bother with them?243 The Rise of the Digital Public 365 As the Google Books settlement was adjudicated before New York’s Southern District Court starting in 2005, European govern- ments and publishers submitted numerous briefs. France and Ger- many weighed in to burnish their bona fides as bearers of high cul- ture (their glorious literary pasts, the number of their Nobel prizes). Both claimed to be the third-l argest producer of books worldwide (though the numbers cited gave the advantage to the Germans). Both governments staunchly backed their publishing industries.244 Of slightly more than a thousand documents submitted to the court, at least three hundred were largely identical form letters from Euro- pean publishers. The Germans alone provided half. One of the first outcomes of these protests was that, to placate European publishers, Google agreed to display only works published in the United States and other common law nations with sufficiently robust fair use pro- visions. Books from France and Germany were removed.245 In this way precisely the outcome that Jeanneney, former head of the French National Library, had fearfully described as the “inevitable Ameri- can self- centering of the selections” was coming to pass.246 Google Books did indeed become a largely Anglophone project but not because of American provincialism. It was thanks to Continental publishers’ insistence on protecting what they liked to portray as European culture but which in fact amounted to their own claims as rights owners. In their court submissions the Germans and the French warned that accepting the settlement would embarrass the United States since it insisted on high standards of protection for others while re- fusing to hold itself to the same.247 Given America’s commitments to international treaties, endless litigation from its trading partners was sure to follow. Once again international standardization ratcheted authorial rights upward. Tied down by the Lilliputian strings of global treaties, one nation, however large and powerful, could no longer go its own way. The role of intellectual property bruiser, played to the hilt by Hol- lywood in the 1990s, now passed to Europe’s publishers. It was no coincidence that seven of the world’s eight largest publishing corpo- rations were European in 2010, while only the smallest one (McGraw- 366 Chapter 8 Hill) was American.248 Most rapacious of all were the scientific pub- lishers. From the 1980s and on, two of the three publishers (Reed Elsevier, Springer, and Wiley) with a monopoly (42 percent) of the 25,000 leading English-l anguage scientific periodicals were Euro- pean. No other publisher controlled more than 3 percent of the mar- ket. They dictated prices, driving costs of journal subscriptions sky- wards, and gutting university library budgets. Their business model was a marvel: sell scholarship back to the same universities whose scientists had produced, written, peer reviewed, and edited it largely for free. Profit margins of between 35 percent and 40 percent were the happy outcome.249 Since their products were unique, no substitu- tion possibilities threatened their monopoly. As Deutsche Bank ob- served of Reed Elsevier in 2005, “If the process really were as com- plex, costly and value- added as the publishers protest that it is, 40% margins wouldn’t be available.”250 Scientific publishers, the Guardian noted in 2011, make Rupert Murdoch look like a Socialist.251 Besides banknotes, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung agreed in 2012, scien- tific papers are the most lucrative thing you can print.252 The scandal of the scientific journal publishers is well known. Less publicized, but worth telling, is another peculiarity of the (central) European publishing industry—the dissertation presses. In Anglo- phone universities a doctoral dissertation is not a book. Typically it is filed as a typescript or digitally online with the certifying univer- sity and usually, as in the US and now also the UK, with a centralized institution that supplies paper reproductions at reasonable cost. An- glophone scholars sometimes turn dissertations into proper books, but that is another matter. A German doctoral dissertation, however, is not official, nor part of a degree, until it has been “published.” Pub- lished in this sense, however, does not mean submitting it to a pub- lisher, having it peer reviewed, revised, edited, and proofread. Until recently, “publishing” a German dissertation meant having a so- called dissertation press (Dissertationsdruckerei) photocopy the type- script, slap it between boards with some glue slicked down the spine, and deliver a few copies to the university library. Today things are somewhat different. A sufficiently interesting German dissertation might be accepted by a commercial publisher, bypassing the university publishing ritual and going straight to the The Rise of the Digital Public 367 normal book market. Sometimes German students pay to have their books published by commercial publishers, thus blurring the line between them and the dissertation presses. To avoid scams, universi- ties usually require a minimum commercial print run.253 For doc- toral candidates who stick with the dissertation presses, things have also changed somewhat. Thanks to desktop publishing the final product looks more like a proper book, even if there is still no edito- rial process. Little, if anything, is added between finishing the PhD thesis and having it appear in print. The dissertation presses no lon- ger command the German landscape unchallenged. Many disserta- tions in the natural sciences are now published digitally or in peri- odicals. But in the social sciences and humanities paper and binding are still preferred. It is unclear what percentage of German disserta- tions are published by these specialized presses. But even if it is only a fraction of the 25,000 dissertations written annually in Germany, it still represents a significant slice of the 78,000 German books issued every year.254 Indeed, in Germany scores, if not hundreds, of small and other- wise wholly obscure presses exist solely to “publish” dissertations. They are businesses set up only to profit from the monopoly created by the dissertation publishing requirement. Earlier the costs were borne entirely by the student, as with vanity presses. Today the stu- dent is occasionally spared the production costs, if the press can re- coup its outlays from a captive audience of scholarly libraries. But mostly students cover the expenses.255 Some websites even provide a convenient calculator for prospective authors to tally what bringing forth their book will cost them.256 Among the hundreds of German publishers submitting briefs to the New York court that rejected the Google Books settlement were doubtless ones whose profits derive from such academic bottom- feeding. And certainly their interests were aligned with their more conventional peers. To the extent that Judge Denny Chin paid the European publishers’ many submissions any heed, he listened also to foreign rent- seekers who enrich them- selves among the pointless obstacles the German state governments throw up to the dissemination of taxpayer- financed academic re- search. They were among the forces thwarting Google’s Alexandrine ambitions. 368 Chapter 8 The attempted settlement tarnished Google’s credentials among American open access activists. A deal with the publishers seemed to be placing its hand in the lion’s mouth. From our vantage, however, the important point is that, in the United States the publishers’ and authors’ opposition was the lobbying of one interest group. In Eu- rope, government authority once again allied with the content indus- tries to protect the private property of rights owners, all the while beating the drum of high- cultural principle. Pressured by European publishers, Google abandoned its ambi- tions to digitize worldwide. The settlement between Google, authors, and publishers was rejected by Judge Chin in March 2011. When fur- ther negotiations between the three parties bore no fruit, the Au- thors Guild again sued for copyright violation. Pending appeal, it lost in November 2013 when Judge Chin determined that, because Google put works to transformative new purposes, the Books Project was fair use. That allowed Google to continue digitizing and show- ing snippets of works, while users could search books which were not, unless in the public domain, displayed online in their entirety. By 2013 Google’s digitization had become an ingrained part of online culture, no longer as controversial as a decade earlier. Searching Google’s books, Judge Chin pointed out, was now an essential re- search tool, spawning new scholarly fields like text and data mining. It allowed more efficient discovery of little-k nown works and the preservation of obscure and endangered ones. Even publishers, he admonished, should be thankful for increased sales. And Google ex- panded access for the handicapped and where traditional libraries were sparse.257 In the meantime, Google signed an emasculated version of the US settlement with the French publishing industry in June 2012. Rights holders had to opt in, rather than being included by default. That left unattended most “orphaned” works—ones that were out of print but still in copyright. Their rights holders were unknown, and they were therefore suspended in legal limbo. (Thanks to Berne’s principle of automatically protecting works as of creation, the majority of twentieth- century works are orphaned and therefore unusable by others.) The original publishers also had the final say over which The Rise of the Digital Public 369 works Google could digitize.258 In effect, the agreement allowed French publishers to outsource digital editions to Google if they choose not to issue them themselves. While acceptable, this was far from Google’s initial ambitions. But to their credit the French have also begun replicating what Google was attempting. The first installment of that story has been the French law of 1 March 2012, permitting the digitization of works still in copyright but out of print.259 Seeking to counter Google’s “savage” attempts to digitize before having secured rights—moti- vated by profit, as they saw it, and not respect for the author—the French appointed a government entity to accomplish similar ends while saving Europe’s patrimony from an American corporation.260 Pleased with their defeat of Google, the French now took pride in passing the first law worldwide on out- of- print works—jumping the gun on the EU’s directive that emerged only half a year later.261 That directive permitted educational and cultural institutions to digitize orphan works after conducting a diligent search for rights holders and coming up empty.262 The earlier debates now left traces as the French once again discussed how to balance the interests of authors and audiences. Nonetheless, digitization was approached in a tradi- tionally Gallic spirit. As always, French politicians saw their duty as upholding “a conception of the book and of culture that is diametri- cally opposed to the Anglo-S axon view.”263 The law allowed out- of- print books to be digitized—but not just by anyone. An organiza- tion, composed of authors and publishers, could digitize if the rights owners did not commit to do so themselves within six months of the work being listed. The French hoped to make books available that could otherwise be read mainly at the National Library in Paris. But they differed from Google. Owners’ property rights still reigned supreme. Fair use was not to be a wedge to pry open ownership. Ensuring au- thors’ and publishers’ stake in the new medium was as much the law’s point as making works available. Digitized out- of- print books were to be sold like any other, the proceeds divided between writers and publishers. Rights owners, the government noted approvingly, were given pride of place in exploiting digital works. The problem 370 Chapter 8 with digitization, a senator agreed, was that the “myth of universal- ity was accompanied by the temptation of giving it away for free.”264 That had been Google’s fallacy. But, thanks to the new spirit of open access, in one respect a Google-l ike approach triumphed. An amendment proposed allow- ing costless digital dissemination of works whose owners had not objected within a decade. The Sarkozy government fought this sug- gestion as a “confiscation of authors’ rights,” and a “brutal rupture” with the inherited system. The Assembly rejected it as dispossessing authors of their rights.265 Nonetheless, a watered- down version sur- vived into the final law, allowing public libraries to digitize for their patrons out- of- print books from their holdings whose rights owners could not be found.266 French traditions were also respected in the continued role of moral rights. Authors retained the final say over new electronic edi- tions, modeled on the withdrawal right. If they felt their honor or reputation threatened, they could refuse permission to digitize.267 Yet such solicitude was motivated by less than noble sentiments. Imag- ine an author had written something—oh, say, during the occupa- tion of the Second World War—that he now regretted, a leading senator explained. Surely, he should be able to prevent it from reap- pearing.268 Rarely had the unappetizing aspects of moral rights been so baldly stated. The Senate, however, did reject an even more indul- gent proposal to allow heirs to express their distaste in forewords to digitized editions of works that they disliked or were ashamed of.269 THE CHATTERING CLASSES DIVIDE Thanks to divergent historical trajectories, disputes over digitality’s effects came earlier in the United States than Europe. But the intel- lectual classes also aligned themselves differently across the Atlantic. In chapter 4 we touched on how the cult of Romantic authorship did not flourish in the Anglo- American world. The British and Americans resisted the Continental ideology in part because they had a less exalted view of what authors did. As early as 1762, William Warburton had noted the shameless use that authors made of others’ The Rise of the Digital Public 371 efforts when he argued against works being considered property.270 In “The Art of Book-M aking” (1819) Washington Irving took this view of literary creation as parasitical even further. Like birds, who served nature’s intent by excreting fruit seed, so authors were but a means of conveyance, passing ideas from old works into the present.271 If disseminating others’ ideas was their primary function, little purpose was served by guaranteeing authors inalienable rights to their par- ticular interpretation of society’s common themes. The work was as much the reader’s as the poet’s. “For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you,” as Walt Whitman assured his audience in 1855.272 Originality and creation ex nihilo were discounted in the An- glophone world, which emphasized instead the social nature of knowledge, the borrowing and use of others’ works. “Every book in literature, science and art, borrows, and must necessarily borrow, and use much which was well known and used before,” Justice Story pro- nounced in 1845.273 In the twentieth century postmodernism’s focus on how works are socially constructed and how authors rely on their cultural in- heritance comfortably fit longstanding domestic American intellec- tual traditions. Postmodernism sparked less controversy than in Eu- rope with its Romantic leanings.274 It is a commonplace that the French philosophers of postmodernism—Althusser, Barthes, Fou- cault, Lyotard, Derrida, and Deleuze—had far greater impact in the United States than at home.275 Postmodernism meshed well with the nineteenth- century pragmatist school of American thought that in many respects anticipated it.276 Pragmatists, too, considered ideas to be socially generated. They were neither just out there, waiting to be uncovered, nor the product of solitary genius.277 Such pragmatist concepts had influenced judicial thinking, paving the way for work- for-h ire in the late nineteenth century.278 A century later they pre- pared the ground for postmodernism’s triumphal march through the American academy and its law schools. One jurist dates the entry of postmodernism into American jurisprudence to 2006, with Jeff Koons’s vindication as a bricolage auteur for his use of an advertising photograph in a painting.279 The Romantic author thus started at a disadvantage in the Anglo- phone world. From there it went downhill. European intellectuals 372 Chapter 8 marshaled in support of the independent author. Their Anglo- American peers more often fought for the public domain. The dis- seminator’s role was crucial here. Competitors for the same pot of gold, authors and disseminators were natural antagonists. A story had Antoine Choudens, the composer Charles Gounod’s publisher, out for a walk, dressed in a sumptuous fur coat and a battered old hat. Gounod approached him, eyed the coat and said bitterly, “Ah, Faust.” “Yes, but,” replied Choudens, indicating the hat, “the Tribut de Zamora.” Choudens had paid Gounod ten thousand francs for Faust, but ten times as much for Zamora.280 Yet the mutual hostility of author and disseminator paled in comparison to what united them against the public. However the spoils were divided between them, they agreed on resisting the public’s demand for cheap enlightenment. In turn, the public’s view of authors and disseminators was influ- enced by differences between copyright and authors’ rights. In the web era Anglophonia saw a sharp conflict between consumers and rights holders. Thanks to the work’s physicality, cultural transactions had earlier seemed akin to exchanges of other goods. Now, with the decrease—ostensibly to zero—in marginal costs of each extra digital copy, the consumer was apparently getting an unprecedentedly raw deal. As digitality promised ever cheaper copies, the owners’ insis- tence on their cut made them appear greedy. These owners—pub- lishers and media corporations—faced the public as the chief cul- prits. Authors were but their appendages. Copyright’s practice of full assignment of rights and work- for- hire, where the corporation pre- tended to be the author, compounded this basic market asymmetry. On the Continent, in contrast, to the extent there was any tension, it was between the real authors, supported of course by their dissemi- nators, and the audience. Disseminators were shielded by the good- will that still extended to authors. But in the Anglosphere it was the rights holders—largely the disseminators—whom the audience viewed as the exploiters.281 Consumer fury was here vented with none of the residual sympathy that still tempered hostility toward authors in Europe. Naturally, authors in America lined up to support the dis- seminators. But they were so clearly the stooges of Hollywood and New York’s corporate interests that they garnered little sympathy. That bestselling and celebrity authors were the ones trotted out at The Rise of the Digital Public 373 the congressional hearings and in paid ads did little to boost their cause. Were the titans of Tinseltown really to be pitied as artistes in their garrets? Who cried if rock stars had to fly commercial? Ameri- ca’s traditional disregard for its authors, its refusal to succumb to the Romantic myth of the tortured genius, bit the creator once again. Like the original Battle of the Booksellers, the digital defense of au- thors in the Anglosphere was a cuckoo exercise, disseminators squeezing their oversized eggs into the creator’s nest. Pretending that they benefited authors, the bitter pill of ever- stronger property claims for disseminators was sugarcoated for consumers to swallow.282 Since moral rights had never played an important role in the Anglo- American world, public discussion dealt primarily with au- thors’ economic rewards. So long as they got a fair—if perhaps no longer extravagant—shake, the audience was unlikely to man the ramparts on their behalf. But in Europe authors were the focus and disseminators only their unavoidable sidekicks. Moral rights rein- forced the fiction of authorial predominance, even as exploitation rights were signed away. European intellectuals thus found it easier to support authors while ignoring how the stronger rights granted them were pocketed largely by their disseminators. Insofar as the European left abandoned its traditionally unconditional support for authors and began to consider also the audience’s claims, its own bohemian flank attacked it for treason. Having failed to punish digi- tal downloading severely, French Socialists stood accused by authors of spurning culture and joining the camp of unbridled capitalism. The CEOs of the multinational internet corporations might wear jeans and T- shirts, authors warned left- wing politicians. But they were still greedy, savagely predatory digital capitalists.283 In Europe, then, the myth of the independent author still com- manded veneration. In America, however, it was the salaried intelli- gentsia which dominated the airwaves. No well- organized class of literati had sprung forth in nineteenth- century America. In the fledg- ling republic it was a common lament that authors had little clout. Witness only the disregard with which the nation had imposed copy- right on its own writers while flooding the market with cheap for- eign works.284 Cornelius Mathews complained in 1843: “Here an au- thor is an anomaly; a needless excrescence of nature; a make-t rouble 374 Chapter 8 and mar- plot, a mere impertinence. A book is supposed to grow up by some sort of spontaneous process beyond the seas, and to be im- ported into this country with Rootabaga and Yellow Hop.”285 Authors with day jobs were common. In the first half of the nineteenth cen- tury, at most one- fifth of American writers counted literature as their primary source of income.286 Not until James Fenimore Cooper did America produce its first “professional” author. As he liked to point out, thanks to the trade in British writers, in America “the printer came into existence before the Author.”287 Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and James Russell Lowell were pro- fessors, Nathaniel Hawthorne was US consul in Liverpool, Washing- ton Irving was a merchant, Ralph Waldo Emerson lectured and was a minister, Edgar Allan Poe was an editor, Henry David Thoreau a jack- of- all- trades.288 T. S. Eliot was a banker, William Carlos Williams a physician, and William Faulkner wrote As I Lay Dying while work- ing in a power plant. Dashiell Hammett was employed by Pinker- ton’s and the railroads, and Nathanael West was the night manager of a hotel. Wallace Stevens was an insurance executive and turned down a faculty position at Harvard to remain vice president of his Hartford firm. Charles Ives, also an insurance executive, helped de- velop modern estate planning.289 A 1976 study calculated that only three hundred writers in the United States could live off their literary earnings (of ten million aspiring colleagues).290 A 1979 survey of over two thousand writers found that almost half held paid positions besides freelance writ- ing.291 Whatever the precise figures, the number of successfully self- employed writers was small. On the other hand, many American writers and composers did well in Hollywood. Though mostly sala- rymen, they enjoyed some of the strongest union protection on the planet.292 “The creative motion picture community is not helpless in any way,” a spokesman for the other side, the Motion Picture Associa- tion, argued in 1988. “As we speak, the writers of Hollywood are in the process of either striking or not striking on a matter which would involve creative rights. They have high-p riced lawyers, experienced labor negotiators. They are not supine.”293 Was the situation different in Europe? During the late nineteenth century a “respectable man of letters” in Britain was able to earn an income and hold a position comparable to that of a doctor or law- The Rise of the Digital Public 375 yer.294 In Germany, where patronage was less common than in En- gland or France, by the late eighteenth century an “epidemic of read- ing” (Leseseuche) had created a large and eager public. Alas, it was not yet able to sustain many authors on their writings alone. Gotthard Lessing was a librarian and Christoph Wieland a professor.295 Goethe was a lawyer, but as a civil servant and advisor to the court of Weimar, he belonged more to the era of patronage. Friedrich Klopstock found a patron in Frederick V of Denmark. Lamartine is perhaps best un- derstood in the French tradition of literary statesmen, followed down to the current day by François Mitterrand, Dominique de Villepin, and others. Kafka worked in insurance before becoming a work- man’s compensation actuary and made no attempt to live off his writing. J. K. Huysmans worked for thirty years in the French Minis- try of the Interior, Primo Levi was a chemist, and Carlo Levi pinch- hit as a physician during his exile to Lucania in the 1930s. Ibsen was a pharmacist in his youth, W. H. Auden was briefly a schoolmaster, J.R.R. Tolkien and C. S. Lewis were dons, and Philip Larkin a librar- ian. Dorothy Sayers worked as a teacher and copywriter. So, perhaps the contrast across the Atlantic is not stark. Whatever the sociology, the ideology of those authors who did not live from selling their works neatly dovetailed with the prospects held out by digitality. This included some already well- off authors. But primarily it was the salaried intelligentsia that rallied behind the digital ideology. They could most conveniently insist on the planks of the digital dogma: creativity is collective, sharing stimulates pro- ductivity more than property does, freely flowing information is the ultimate good, and so forth. It was easy enough for them to suggest that the “reputational capital” of widely disseminated works was more valuable than actually selling books. Or that authors would be paid for performance and service, not for marketing works.296 Their well-u pholstered position allowed them to speculate whether per- haps authors were motivated by considerations other than the mar- ket’s incentives.297 Only the salaried could suggest that selling works be replaced by mutual gifts of self- expression—the adult equivalent of childish play.298 The few American men of letters who sided with traditional “Eu- ropean” authors’ rights unwittingly presented themselves as genteel dinosaurs—and were mocked accordingly. John Updike rather feebly 376 Chapter 8 critiqued Kevin Kelly’s vision of a digital Alexandrian library by nos- talgically recalling his days of privilege and access at Harvard and Oxford, browsing the shelves at Grolier’s and Blackwell’s. He evoked his quaint New England town with its independent bookstore as the foil to what he considered the Marxist Moloch of the Google li- brary.299 Mark Helprin, old- school novelist and conservative pugilist, posing for his jacket photo by a baby grand, presented himself as the sort of literary fop who drives the digiterati to apoplexy, his prose oozing the ambiance of the gentleman’s club, his faux cold shoulder to the modern world. Helprin’s unremarkable arguments in favor of extending copyright terms provoked outrage. His initial piece ran on the New York Times op- ed page, which had invited him to fill the doldrums with what he judged to be an anodyne topic.300 Within ten days it had been widely commented upon online. Helprin then de- cided that a book- length version, expanded into a jeremiad against the modern world, would calm things down.301 So tightly into the wind of self- parody did Helprin tack that we cannot dismiss the pos- sibility that he is a fifth columnist. But taken at face value, he argued the classic postulates of the moral rights ideology, especially the in- tegrity right and the author’s claim to have his voice heard precisely as intended. His views would not have raised an eyebrow in France. But in America such studied anachronism was a red flag to the digi- tal bulls. Nonetheless, the aging Romantic authors did have a point. Digi- tality has gutted the inherited business models and few new means to earn a living have emerged. Authors should earn their keep in other ways, Kevin Kelly suggested. “They can sell performances, ac- cess to the creator, personalization, add- on information, the scarcity of attention (via ads), sponsorship, periodic subscriptions—in short all the many values that cannot be copied.”302 The slapdash, unrealis- tic, in parts unintelligible, nature of this list testifies to its unresolved contradictions. Updike might be fusty, but he rightly took Kelly to task for this naïve view—a “grisly scenario” of the author singing for his supper. Another digital insider, the dreadlocked computer scientist, com- poser, and inventor of virtual reality, Jaron Lanier, agreed with Up- dike. He defied anyone to point to more than a handful of musicians The Rise of the Digital Public 377 living from the web’s supposedly “new” economy.303 Perhaps the Grateful Dead, who sold special tickets to a section of seats reserved for bootleg tape recorders back in the analog era, had managed to find an alternative business model.304 But they were largely alone. Independent musicians have often cried foul. The same generation that willingly paid extra for fair trade coffee and stood in line over- night to snap up Apple’s latest sleek device proved reluctant to pay for content. “Congratulations,” one musician mocked, “your genera- tion is the first generation in history to rebel by unsticking it to the man and instead sticking it to the weirdo freak musicians!”305 Thanks to downloading, musicians now faced the “Bowie Theory,” the unfor- giving syllogism by which tours and concerts alone earned them money.306 For all their foppish airs the old-s choolers who defended authors were canaries in the digital mine. Their objections marked a largely ignored fault line between salaried and self- employed literati. “Why is it always the guys with the cushy and secure jobs who tell you tweedle de dee, ideas should be free?” complained Ted Nelson, coiner of the phrase “hypertext.”307 Independent writers were civilization’s bastion, Helprin insisted. The drones of “the academy, think tanks, or various other corporate bodies” owed allegiance to their department heads.308 Tenured professors, New Yorker staff writers, think tankers— all had their feet on dry land. Independent authors were angered by their salaried peers’ sellout to what they saw as the false idols of open access. In America these last few Romantic creators remained staunch defenders of authorial privileges—alongside aging rockers. Metalli- ca’s drummer, Lars Ulrich, and Kiss’s bassist, Gene Simmons, aggres- sively supported copyright and musicians’ claims to make a living selling their wares. In return radical digiterati hacked their websites and boycotted their music. “Make sure there are no incursions,” was Simmons’s message. “Be litigious. Sue everybody. Take their homes, their cars. Don’t let anybody cross that line.”309 In 2007 Prince accused YouTube of being perfectly able to filter out porn and pedophilia while turning a blind eye to copyrighted music.310 Mark Helprin and Gene Simmons, united at last to defend the young Werther school of Romantic creativity: we are uncomfortably close to the farcical pos- sibilities with which this chapter began. 378 Chapter 8 EUROPEAN HEGEMONY? Left- of- center Americans often support and admire European poli- cies: on the death penalty, state welfare, health care, and public edu- cation. But on copyright (much as with free speech—another issue where trans- Atlantic differences are profound) the libertarian and anarchic strain of American liberal ideology has prevailed.311 Only rarely—certainly not on the left nor even very often on the right— was the European model of thick authorial rights held up for praise in America. Of course, the content industries pursued their own con- cerns when adhering to the Berne ideology. Moral rights, in turn, were advocated by Hollywood’s auteurs, hoping to curb the indus- try’s corporate self-i nterest, as well as by other authors out to increase their aesthetic heft. But unlike their European peers many American liberals and intellectuals regarded such author- centrism as an out- moded obeisance to elitism. In any case it was seen as out of sync with the digital age and its polymorphously collaborative creativity. It is all the more striking, then, that during the 1990s American policy bowed to the content industries’ imperative and swung copy- right’s traditional emphasis on the public domain around to a more European focus on rights owners’ claims. Impelled by the dictates of new collaborative cultural endeavors and digital technologies, the Europeans did make a few concessions to copyright practices, adopt- ing limited forms of work-f or- hire for film and software, for example. Yet, seen in long historical perspective, it is clear that those who were most smartly changing gear were the Americans—and to a lesser extent the British.312 In 1954 the Senate Judiciary Committee had listed the three main reasons why the Berne Convention was at vari- ance with “our basic theory and philosophy on copyrights” and why the United States could not join: automatic recognition of copyright without any formalities, protection of moral rights, and the retroac- tive application of protection to works already in the public do- main.313 Within a few years, first in the late 1970s and then a decade later, these supposedly insurmountable obstacles had all been swept away. America was being carried along in Europe’s wake. The Rise of the Digital Public 379 How was this possible? Clearly the content industries bent the Clinton administration’s ear. But simply to identify the economic interests that benefited most from this American policy volte-f ace is not enough. Corporate interests rarely had a uniform position on strong intellectual property rights. In the nineteenth century reprint- ing publishers had opposed international copyright while publishers who issued domestic authors were in support. The sound-r ecording industry had thrived in the absence of copyright during the 1890s, while the sheet- music publishers cried out for stronger protection. Today Hollywood’s moment of supremacy in the 1990s has been challenged as Silicon Valley’s internet and computer industries base their business models on web data’s free availability. Inevitably both author and audience align with some economic interests. However tempting to vilify those who profit from strong protection as though they were a unified class, the battle has rarely been between corpo- rate interests tout court and the general public. Though colored by the economic concerns of a varying cast of actors, the fundamental dispute has been ideological: whose concerns should prevail, the au- thor’s or the audience’s. In an era of much ballyhooed US cultural imperialism, it is not facetious to speak of European hegemony too. Much like the United States, the EU presented its model as a universally valid example to be commended to nations abroad.314 EU harmonization pushed lev- els of intellectual property protection upward. Across the Atlantic, too, rights strengthened. “In recent years,” one American observer complained in 2004, “ ‘the labor- equals- property principle’ has come to dominate.”315 The battles detailed in this chapter were the outcome of the still unresolved popular reaction against the pendulum’s swing toward Berne’s dogma of authorial preeminence. Authors’ rights were but one policy where the Americans followed European ex- amples. The ensuing Europeanization of American policy was, of course, a victory for some within the bestiary of US economic inter- ests. More important, the outcome was major change to long- standing American political and cultural traditions. Copyright was not the only field where globalization meant Eu- ropeanization. American patent legislation, too, has been European- 380 Chapter 8 ized. Arguably, the US Constitution required that credit be given to the first to invent. The copyright clause empowered Congress to se- cure to authors and inventors “the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries” (emphasis added). Until recently America stuck to first- to- invent, rewarding the creator, not his corporate em- ployer. But under pressure from the Europeans, things have changed. First- to- file offered certain advantages. By eliminating disputes over priority, it was simpler and more certain. And it encouraged mak- ing inventions public at the earliest moment.316 But first-t o-fi le tri- umphed even in the United States because it had become the global standard. If the US inventor was not also the first to file, then he lost his foreign markets. With some globally marketed products, like biotech and pharmaceuticals, the American inventor who did not file first for patent rights might recoup what he had foregone abroad by cross- licensing his US rights in exchange for foreign ones.317 But clearly the advantage lay with the majority. When the America Invents Act of 2011 adopted first-t o- file, the European ap- proach had triumphed. Bankruptcy law is another example of America’s gradual Europe- anization. Historically a debtor nation, America has traditionally al- lowed citizens second chances to bounce back from insolvency. This too has been leached away by the European approach of releasing debtors from their obligations only reluctantly. Bankruptcy has long been more debtor- friendly in the United States than Europe, in some measure to fill a vacuum in social policies.318 But recent changes to consumer bankruptcy law have made student loans, for example, no longer dischargeable via ordinary bankruptcy. They now require separate proceedings and a demonstration of special hardship.319 The bursting of the most recent housing bubble in 2008 thrust a new issue, again imported from Europe, into American discussions. Should house owners with loans be able to walk away from mort- gages, leaving the bank with the property as collateral? Or should they, as in most of Europe, remain personally responsible for contin- ued payments, regardless of what happened to the house? In the United States debt has traditionally been shrugged off via the back- door socialism of lenient bankruptcy laws. But that is becoming harder as European- style standards spread to America. The Rise of the Digital Public 381 Privacy has also been a bone of contention across the Atlantic. True, the Americans have whittled away at banking privacy and the attendant possibilities of tax evasion in Switzerland, Liechtenstein, Austria, and elsewhere in Europe. But the fiscal authorities of Ger- many, Scandinavia, and even some Mediterranean nations have wel- comed the United States here in its role as bad cop. Claiming na- tional security concerns, the Americans have only partly succeeded in requiring information on airline passengers.320 But, more gener- ally, US firms whose business relies on transparency and accumulat- ing information about clients and customers—Google and Face- book—have faced increasingly stiff obstacles as the EU strictly enforces privacy regulations. The traditionally insouciant (Anglo-) American view of privacy as more a convenience than a fundamental right has been dampened by the EU’s determination to clamp down on collecting private information. The new EU “right to be forgot- ten” on the internet contravenes American notions of free speech and will require internet companies to remove broadly defined per- sonal information as demanded by their clients, however far it may have spread in the meantime.321 Examples of America’s Europeanization could be multiplied. The death penalty has become less acceptable thanks to the “Strasbourg effect” exerted by the European Court of Human Rights on US Su- preme Court justices.322 More generally, the EU’s status as the world’s single largest consumer market permits it to set product and manu- facturing standards that US corporations must follow.323 Copyright reform in the 1990s fit this larger pattern of cultural influ- ence westward across the Atlantic. Globalization in such instances meant Europeanization. Converting to long and strong protection, the United States moved away from its traditional view of copyright as a limited monopoly and closer to the European natural rights tradition. “The United States should be leading the world toward a coherent intellectual property policy for the digital age,” Dennis Karjala, copyright lawyer and activist, exclaimed in frustration be- fore Congress in 1995 during debates on the seventy-y ear term, “and not simply following what takes place in Europe.”324 382 Chapter 8 And yet, while Berne may have won the battle in the 1990s, the war was not over. Digital technologies threw up new problems in pro- ducing and disseminating works that required a response in law. Ahead on the digital learning curve and favored by its market’s size, integration, and uniformity, the United States travelled this path ahead of the Europeans. Both the attempts to impose new legal and technological protections for rights owners and the reaction against authors’ and assignees’ overweening demands therefore came earlier in the US than on the Continent. But in a longer perspective the imperatives for change were similar everywhere. Digitality held out such promises of open and broad access that the Enlightenment dreams of a universal library for all humanity were reawakened early in the new millennium. Whether eventually achieved by Google or by others, the Alexandrian vision is now plau- sible. The downloaders have not, of course, all been motivated by higher causes. But mixed in with the digital piracy and pilfering has also been a robust commitment to the public domain. Having lost out in the 1990s to Hollywood and Berne’s insistence on strong pro- tection, the traditional vision of copyright as a limited monopoly that—while keeping authors happy—fundamentally serves the pub- lic interest has returned as an aspiration. Rejuvenated in the United States, where it had never entirely died, it is now echoed among the pirate parties and youthful downloaders of Western Europe and the digitally aspirational citizens of the former East. The battle between author and audience continues.