VOL'ta 73rt Ne\v8 VOL XVIII. No. 8 Entered as secrnd class mail matter. NEW YORK. DECE-MBER 13, 1919 TEN PAGES SINGLE COPIES, 10 CENTS A GREAT COLLECTOR PASSES (Copyright 1b, AM\ERICAN\ ART NE\WS CO., IXC.) On March 6, 1915, the AMERICAN ART NEWS publislhed a two-page article de voted to Mr. Frick and his succession to Mr. J. Pierpont Morgan as the great American art collector, entitled "Mor gan Passes-Frick Arrives," an article which met with the dead collector's modest approval, for he was a man who shunned and sincerely disliked publicity. This article, with a list of the pictures he had purchased up to that time (now brought up to date with the accessions of the past four years), it is thought best to republish this week, when the news of the collector's sur prising and generous gift of his house and collections to the city of his later residence followingNs widow's pass ing, and his equally generous endow ment of the house and collections, has been made public. Mr. Morgan's Successor In the recent passing oT Henry C. Frick, the country lost its most eminent art col lector and one who, had he lived a few years longer, would possibly have rivalled J. Pierpont Morgan, whose death in March, 1913, removed not only the greatest col lector of art and literary property America has ever had, but perhaps one of the great est, if the variety and scope of his treas ures are considered, the world had ever known. But if Mr. Frick had not had the years of opportunity, unlimited wealth and a cer tain inherited and acquired taste and judg ment that were Mr. Morgan's, and con sequently had not ventured, when the close of his earthly career came, into other fields of, art than those of pictures, sculptures and, to a limited extent, tapestries and porcelains, he purchased wisely and well, at first through and by the advice of such com petent judges as Messrs. Carstairs and Rol and Knoedler, who really first inspired his art collecting, and later, as his taste formed and his knowledge grew, more on his own initiative, although he still wisely submitted his choice before actually decid ing, to dcalers and critics, to whose knowl edge and judgment he deferred. A writer in the N. Y. Times well says of Mr. Frick as follows: "He was one of the small group of American collectors of art whose collecting was clone with the min gling of personal ardor and sound judg ment essential to success in this very difficult pur suit. Later in the field than Messrs. Mor gan and Altman, he had somewhat different problems to solve and he knew how to solve them, taking his own way, and often keep ing an important picture in his house for months before deciding to buy it, while in other instances he could make his decision in ten minutes. While he insisted upon making his liking for a work of art the final reason for his purchase of it, he insisted no less upon authenticity and quality, and sought advice where he was sure of its authority. F or this reason it is folly to pin the estimated value of his collection down to thirty million, or forty, or fifty. If it were in the market, as now it cannot be, it would bring what the collectors of the world might wish to pay for inlcomparable examples by the greatest masters. His interest inl art was intensified by his desire to benefit the public through his collections, which he planlned for the city and developed with the scrupulous spirit of a loyal trustee. His pictures, to say nothing of other objects of art in his possession, are a series of great works, and their number, in view of their excellence, is astonlishing. Not all are to go to the city, as those remaining at Pride's Crossing belong to Mliss t'rick and are of various schools and periods. The most important thlings are, hlowever, in the Nl. Y. gallery." Mr. Frick's Early Years The story of AvIr. Frick as an art collec tor can be briefly told. His art collecting followved close upon his withdrawval from the great steel industries in Pittsburgh, through anld by wvhichl his immense fortune was made-after his well-remlemubered break with* Andrew Carnegie, now more thani nineteen years ago. Born in the village of West Overton, Pa., in 1849, so that he is now 66 (70 at his death-Ed.), Henry C. Frick had a common school education, and, like his fellows in that section, went to work at an early age. There was little knowledge or talk of art in Pittsburgh in those days, and even, when after years of labor and train ing, he organized in 1871, the firm of Frick & Co., Coke Manufacturers, and the follow ing year the H. C. Frick Coke Co., of which he was the President until 1897. But with the years and rapidly growing wealth, Mr Frick began to interest himself in literature and the arts, and he was blessed with natural taste and discernment. The Coming of Carstairs In the late nineties Mr. Charles S. Car stairs, himself a Phila. man, who had be come connected with the N. Y. art house of Knoedler & Co., reaped a fortune for his I 111 ~ HENRY CLAY FRICK. firm, on the Pittsburg1h "boom," and fame and fortune for himself by the selling of pictures to the new Pittsburgh millionaires, and the exploiting of the able French por trait painter, the late Theobald Chartran who was said to have painted the portraits of half of the new Pittsburgh millionaires with a consequent fortune for himself, which he enjoyed, alas, for too short a time before his untimely death. Mr. Frick knew and liked Mr. Carstairs, and a close friendship grew and flourished between the two men one which still exists-with the happy re sult that the formiier was guided in his art collecting path, not only by Mr. Carstairs and the reputable house which he repre sented, and, of wMhich he later became a partner, but by the head of the same firm, Mr. Roland Knoedler, with whom in turn Mr. Frick formed as close and still existing a friendship as that which he held with Mr. Carstairs. Mr. Frick had become a partner in 1882 in Carnegie Brothers, later changed to Car negie Bros. & Co., of wvhich he was chair man, 1889-1892, in whiclh last year it was con solidated with Carnegie, Phipps & Co., of which firm he was also chairman of the Board of Managers until 1892, and under the Carnegie Steel Co. until 1897. He married in 1881 Mliss Adelaide Howard Clhilds, and the couple have lhad two clhildren, Mr. Childs Frick, a graduate of Princeton, of which university, Mr. Henry C. Frick has lately been made a trustee (This explains his splendid legacy of fifteen millions to Prince toin.-Ed.), and Miss Helen E. Frick. Becomes a New Yorker Soon after the trainsfer of the Carnegie Steel Co.'s interests to the U. S. Steel Com paniy, and the break with Mr. Carnegie, Mr. Feick looked towards N. Y., as is the custom of mid-Western and WVestern mil lionaires, as a place of residence and a few years ago leased for a long term the former residence of Mr. William H. Vanderbilt at Fifth Ave. and 51 St., from the late George Vanderbilt. The handsome brownstone house had a large and fine picture gallery, which had long housed the first large collec tion of pictures in America, that formed by the late William H. Vanderbilt, and be queathed to his son, George, but which col lection had beeni removed to the Metropoli tan Museum, where it remained as a loan until last month. A Most Modest Collector Singularly modest auld unassumirng in manner and life, preferring only the society and companionship of a few old friends and intimates, he was difficult to approach. He did not like, as he does not today, to be questioned as to his art or other posses sions, and so the dealers both here and abroad, who endeavored to interest him in their wares, finally, as a rule, gave up the attempt, and Mr. Frick pursued the "even tenor of hiis way" unmolested and all the time quietly building up a great assem blage of pictures. He never appeared in the public auction rooms, gave his orders for purchases, when lie did so, onilv through his trusted friends, anid had been little known in the art worlds of Europe and America. When he began to go abroad, he w%vent also modestly and quietly, travelled and studied the galleries and private collec tions of Europe only wJith MNIessrs Car stairs and Knoedler; and even these gentle men did not always kniow wvhat art works he had fancied, until directed to buy the same. But of late years he has, on several occasions, and notably during the past monitlh in his acquisition of the Fragonard panels througlh Sir Charles Allom, and again througlh Duveen Brothers, from vwhom he has purchased a goodly portion of the Mor gan porcelains-departed from his buying througlh Messrs. Carstairs and Knoedler. Decides to Build New York Mansion Some three years ago (1912.-Ed.), Mr. Frick, who had become a New Yorker, de cided upon building a handsome local res idence of his owIn, and secured the Fifth Ave. frontage of the old Lenox Library, between 70 and 71 Sts., onl wlhichl the low bungalow-like brownstone residence, with a large and fine picture gallery to occupy the north wing, and so familiar to the residents and those who ride or walk along New York's "Park Lane" or upper Fifth Ave., is nearing completion. He paid for the old Library building and land on which the house stands, $2,400,000, and has expended about $1,600,000 on the house and gardens. The house was designed by Thomas Hastings. There are interesting features yet to be added to the exterior of the building-a grille, a sunken garden, sev eral groups of sculpture, clipped box hedges, gates, etc., and already he has transplanted there thirteen horsechestilut trees. Mr. Frick's orders were for a small house, with plenty of light and air and land. He wished a house that was simple, stately, but not pompous, which would include- galleries for his extraordinary pictures-a Ahouse that would do to present to the city as a mu seum. It is a free treatment of eighteenth-century English architecture, with something of the spirit of the Italians, who were then greatly influencing English building and English taste. The art gallery embraces 3,500 square feet. The Fragonard panels will surround the drawing-room on the first floor. House Resembles Its Owner This house, the latest private palace in the Metropolis, differs as greatly in archi tecture, appolintments and "atmosphere," from those of other New York millionaires, who have "come out of the West," as does its owner in personality, character and tem perament from their respective owners. It is as modest and quiet in appearance and, one might almost say, in manner, as its owner, and bespeaks the character of the man. Those who have met Mr. Frick and who know him at all, are constantly im pressed with his modesty and his shrinking from publicity of any and every kind. Pictures Not Well Known to Public Only through occasional loans to exhibi tions, generally for charitable purposes, at the Knoedler Galleries, and elsewhere, very rarely, and through the information which naturally leaks through the trade, are Mr. Frick's art possessions at all known. The ART NEWS in the list of Mr. Frick's pic tures which appears on page 4, gives as complete a list as can be procured and the only correct list ever published, but must reserve notice of his other art possessions for another day. The list evidences what a really wonderful array of canvases, exempli fying most of the greater names in old and modern foreign art, Mr. Frick possesses, and which, with his lately acquired Fragonards and porcelains, and those he will probably sooner or later secure justifies the belief of the ART NExws that a new and great collector has come UpOnl the scene and that trul- xvith 'M3Irgan's passing, Frick rear rives'." But the question will be asked in this commercialized country and age, how much have Mr. Frick's collections cost him, and what is their present value-has he ex pended or is he likely to expend the mil lions that the late Mr. Morgan put into art ? Ah-"That's another story." Mr. Frick's Great Pictures The wide scope, exceeding richness and value of Mr. Frick's collection of pictures, which number some 180, is not at all realized by the art public. W/Rhile in numbers the collection may not be as large as that of Mr. P. A. B. Widener, probably the largest in America, it has more distinctive and repre sentative exanipyles of the early Italian, Spanish1, Dutch and English schlools than any other American collection, almost every example coming from some famous collec tion or in itself historic, wvhile in modern masters, especially those of the Barbizon and Dutch schools, the collection is also ex (Continued on Page 2) 2 AMERICAN ART NEWS DURAND-RUEL New York - 12 East 57th Stree Paris - 16 Rue Laffitte ANTIQUITIES OLD FABRICS DAWSON 9 EAST .56th.ST. BuT. 5th & MADISON AVES. TAPESTRIES DECORATIONS Picture, Studio and Gallery Lighting EXPER7 ADVICE 1. P. FRINK, Inc. 24th St. and 10th Ave., New York Telephone Bryant 6739 Established 1875 D. CALO & SONS Ameican and Forein Painfings Artistic Picture Frames 107 West 46th Street New York alhQ o6medu'"IdMasters Where you can find Rare Paintings from the 13th to the 20th Centuries WESTON GALLERIES 622 LEXINGTON AVE. NEW YORK Telephone Plaza 4028 Frank K.' M. Rehn Specialist in AMERICAN PAINTINGS 6 West 50th Street NEW YORK_ NATIONAL ACADEMY OF DESIGN WINTER EXHIBITION (Now Open) ADMISSION (including catalog) 50c. FINE ARTS GALLERIES 2315 WEST 57th STREET 10 A.'M. to 6 P. M., Sunday 1:30 to 6 A GREAT COLLECTOR PASSES (Continued from Page 1)l 'ceedingly rich. The only American master represented is Whistler, Mr. Frick having bought, only last year, through Knoedler & fCo., from the late Mr. Richard Canfield,' that artist's celebrated "Rosa Corder," "Count de- Montesquliou," and the "Valpa -raiso." (Gilbert Stuart's "Camperdown" bust portrait of Washington, for which *Mr. Frick paid $75,000, a record price for an American oil, was added in 1918.-Ed.) Early Italian and Spanish Masters The early Italian masters are best repre sented in the collection by Titian's "Por trait of Aretinlo," a picture entirely distinct from that in the Pitti Gallery of Florence, and the two remarkable examples of Paul Veronese, "Wisdom and Strength," and *"The Painter Pursued by Vice and Virtue," these last from the collection of Lord Fran *cis Hope. The early Spanishl masters are splendidly represented in the collection and, in truth, it -would be difficult to find finer works by El Greco than the splendid "Man in Armor," *"Portrait of V. Anlastagi" and "Cardinal Ximenes," and thle dramatic compositions, "Christ Driving the Moneychangers from *the Temple." There are two striking and tvpical portraits bJy Goya, those of the "Count de Teba," and "Senora da Puga," and the composition wvork, "The Forge." The "Philip IV" of Velasquez is a famous work, and there is a portrait by Murillo of himself. Dutch and English Old Masters Of the early Dutch masters, Mr. Frick is -fortunate in the possession of two fine ex amples of the great Vermeer of De'lft, the "Soldier and Laughing Girl," and the "Mu sic Lessonl," (a third Van Meer, "The Lovre Letter," wJas acquired this yrear.-Ed.) of no DEMOTTE of PARIS 27 RUE DE BERRI cordia1ly invites you to visit is new American branck at 8 EAST 57th STREET NEW YORK Second Door from Fifth Avenue OBJETS D'ART TABLEAUX LE MAITRES SCULPTURES MEUBLES DE PERIODES TAPISSERIES TEXTILES PRIMITIFS IVOIRES All antiques of guaranteed autAenticity _ _ ___ _ - - - - - - -_ _-_ _-_ _ less than six or seven Van Dycks, includ ing the world renowned "Portrait of the Artist" from the Earl of Ilchester's collec tion, the "Portrait of the Artist Snyders" (Earl of Carlisle collection), the "Portrait of Snyder's Wife" (Earl of Warwick collec tion), the "Portrait of Paolo Adorno-Mar chesa Brignoli" (Duke of Abercorn collec tion), and those two splendid portraits of "Canevari" and the "Marchesa Giovanna Cattaneo" from the Cattaneo collection of Genoa. Franis Hals is represented by the "Por trait of a Burgoma%ter" (Maurice Kann collection), a self portrait, and the picture of an "Old Woman," for which Knoedler & Co. paid $130,000 in the Yerkes collection sale-a record figure. Rembrandt is splen didly .represented by his self portr-ait (Earl of Ilchester col'lection), the "Polish Rider," with its romantic story, the "Portrait Qf -a Young Painter," and a "Dutch Merchant." There is a most representative example of Jacob Ruysdael, "The Waterfall"; one of Hobbenma, "Cottage Among the Trees"; a fine van de Capelle, "Harbor of Amster dam"; a large and fine Albert Cuyp, a "River Scene with a Barge Full of Pas sengers," and a most typical A. van Ostade, "Halt; at the Inn." Early English Pictures' In the work of the masters of the early English school Mr. Frick,- it may be said has specialized. He has secured. the noted "Portrait of Lady Elizabeth Taylor,"' - by Reynolds (Kann collection) as also the same artist's "Lady Skipworth," thee re markable group portrait by Romney of the "Countess of Warwick and Children,'!' s.01d" out of Warwick Castle in 191.3, and:.,the same artist's beautiful. full-leng.th standingne portrait of "Lady Milne." - Eq.ually inpor tant are Mr. Frick's examples. of 'Gains borough, which include the lovely, -.full length standing portrait of "Lady Ann Dun combe," secured from the -_ Duveen-- Br-t ers alnd shown in their exhibition.- of earYl English portraits last season (1914),. and the same artist's bust . portrait -of ,<Ms,r.M Hatchett." . Sir Thomas Lawrence- is represented by his portrait of "Lady Peale,"- (half-length), probably one of the best- known pictures in the world through its -many reproductions, Constable, by his famous "Salisbury Cathe dral," Hoppner by his beautiful portrait of Miss Elizabeth Beresford" and the great Scottish master, Raeburn,.by the celebrated portrait of "Mrs. Cruikshank," one of the finest Raeburns known, and the portraits of "Mrs. James Cruikshank" and "Dr. Craigie." Mr. Frick owns five Turners-all of sur i5assing quality, namely: "Fishing Boats Entering Calais Harbor," "Regatta-Beat ing to Windward," "Van Goyen Looking for a Subject," (a virile marine) "Mortlake Ter race," and "Arrival Boulogne Packet Boat." Barbizon and Modern Dutch Works There have been several changes among the Barbizon pictures in the collection which still contains a number of examples of the painters of this school-all exceed ingly rich in quality. The really famous examples are the two Corots, "Le Lac de Garde" and "Le Lac," the splendid Millet "Femme a la Lampe," and Rousseau's "Village of Becquigny." Jacob Maris's "The Bridge," and a fine Josef Israels are the features of the modern Dutch pictures. These pictures emphasize the importance and quality of Mr. Frick's collection. Early French Masters The prizes among the French pictures are, characteristically, not pictures but a room, and such a room as only XVIII Century France could evoke at the price of courtiers'I heads and the thrones of kings. The four teen panels painted by Fragonard by order of Louis XV for the favorite, Madame du Barry, tell the story of lovemaking as the century knew it-too literally, as one of them shows us the flight of Love after all the excitemenlt is over, and the favorite re jected them all because of this cynical true touchl.I As paintings the panels are the finest and gayest flowers in that coniventional French gardein of lilies and roses. They show.all moderni decoration how to play a scrupulous game. (The four famous panels of "The Seasons," by Boucher, from the Ridgway col-lection of Paris, Mr. Frick purch'ased from the Edward R. Bacon collection of N. Y. in 1916.-Ed.) Collector's Death Affects Art Markets "Mr. Frick intended, duirng the present winter, to expend an additional $20,000,000 in buying more pictures and more objects of art so as to complete his idea of a museum which should perpetuate his mem ory. "On absolute authority it can be said that Mr. Frick intended to acquire enough works this year to -convert every room in -his mansion into. a gallery. "This word had gone out to the art deal ers, and the experts, of at least four great firms, acting on- his unofficial behest, had traversed war-shaken. Europe during la'st summer and early autumn, where they ob tained scores ' of extremely important works, and, they ' were . only waiting the leisurely 'aproval of the great collector to transfer their .-ownership to him. ."-Now -that Mr. Fric'k is- gone, the great dealers who were acting as his agents have on: their hands- millions of dollars' worth of the finest work's of art in the world. What these works are'may never be made known,'-but it- is .said that, if a list of them were, published, it' 'would caus'e a sensa tion. , , ."Now,;.-What. will become of the great a.rti .orks-that have been brought to Amer 'it fr-ZMr.-Prick? There is-a chance that 'th!e-`'coll'ector may have' provided in his will a. fu:n.dwith .which' to complete his plans or. that his' heirs may voluntarily-' fulfill his wishes, 'but, if, neither. of 'thLese transpires, will the're be'fo.und a- market for them' in this 'couintry 6r.will 'th'ey have to be sent back . to.,.Europe? ' W.ho .among our -Multi mil'ionair'aes:will step 'into M-Mr. Frick's shoes ? '"Six great American collectors have pased n15 the h stage 'in t the' last- Tew - years Messrs .M iran, -Elkings.- Widener, John 'son,- Freer and Frick. Thesea'men may be said virtually to have brought 'art to America. The works thbey -so eagerly ac ouired 'will forever remain here. Most of them' .are now.. the p,roperty of the public. as each of these'-collectors. had the welfare of posterity in -mind, rathere than their own gratification. . The importance of their work, - from -an art standpoint, cannot be overestimated. "Will the mcwement of great works of art to America be appreciablv checked by the death of these six men ' There are in dustrial leaders who have made milions and millions since the outbreak of the world war. Some of them, like John N. Willys and Charles M. Schwal), have already be gun to form collections. "The public, as well as the great art firms that have developed in America in the last ten years, will anxiously await the out come." (Peyton Boswell, in N. Y. American.) (A full list of Frick Pictures on page 4) The society, "Friends of American Art," in Chicago, which every year purchases an American painting for the permanent ex-| hibition at the Chi.cago Art Institute thisi year invested $1,200 in Sidney Dickinlson's finle "Nude," recently on exhibition at the Institute Galleries. Martha W. Baxter recently completed a miniature portrait of the little SOn of Mr Robert Macbeth, a sequel to the portrait she painted of his little daughter last year. Both works have been highly satisfactory to the parents At her Sherwood studio Mtiss Baxter has just finlished a presentmenlt ;tol 0., of Mliss Alice Rising, of Cal. I Messrs. E. & A. Mi1ch HIGH CLASS AMERICAN PAINTINGS 108 WC5t 57th Street Ncxt to the Leto& Clu$ Sangiorgi Gallery lItne f[rts A fntique% A -Mecoration New York Studio: 55 E. 56th St. RO M: BORGIIESE PALACE NETHERLANDS GALLERY (Walter J. Abraham) Pictures by the ancient Dutch, Flemish and Early English Masters. 1 la, King Street, St. James's, London WM. B. PATERSON Pictures by Old Masters Chinese Pottery and Paintings 5 OLD BOND S TREET, LONDON, 1 S. T. SMITH & SON OLD MASTERS PASTELS 37 Duke Street, St. James's, London ESTABLISHED 1790 ARTIUR GREATOREX Fine Art Dealer Publisher of Modern Original Etchings and Mezzotints. l_14 Grafton St., London, W. E THE LEICES^TkR GALLERIES 1 Leicester Square - - LONDON. . ERNEST BROWN AND P-HILLIPS, P.roprietor. Etchings by Whistler, Zorn, Meryon and other Masters. XFine Drawings-Old and Modem I EzhiLitions o' the Best Modern. Art LENNIE D)AVIS. Pictures by Old Masters 7 Place Vendome - - Paris BAGRAVLICLGt - ftTCHUNGtV . AI(TI~/TIC FRAMJJNT ~R>WLDLN[G PAW TINGcat-F(ThL>4fD -R:Tt0RftDI 601 GNIs3 7/5-N7s)WBEKI PAINTINGS: 1E30 Innesses, 20 Remingtons Ainslie Art Galleries, 615 Fifth Avenue ARTIST'S CARD FOR SALEPlate Printing: Press for Etcher'si use. J. F. Mac Carthy, 339 Lexington Ave.,, New York City. Important Examples of OLD CHINESE PORCELAIN from GORER OF LONDON on Exhibition at Parish, Watson & Co., Inc. American Re-breentatives 560 FIFTH AVENUE NEW YORK Entrance as hitherto through Dreicer & Co. THE WINTER ACADEMY The Winter Academy, which will open today to the public in the Fine Arts Gal leries, West 57th St., following the usual private view and reception yesterday, and which is made up of 85 sculptures and 294 oils, as against 53 sculptures and 308 oils last year, canot be truthfully considered as an unusual or in any way a briliant display. It has no "Star" works, nor in fact any of especial note, and there are far too many of the stronger painters and sculptors un represented. The current exhibition of rep resentative American landscapes at the Reinhardt Galeries, considering the fact that there are very few portraits and figure works in the Academy display, is really a far more interesting show. The faling off in the average of merit in this year's Winter Academy is to be deplored, and it is evident that those Academicians and Associates who are still loyal to the old institution, but who fail to prove their faith by send ing in their works, must make a new de parture if future Winter Academy shows are to maintain any standard. But there is never an Academy Show! without some good sculptures and paint ings, and the visitor will find in the present displays here and there, works which arrest attention, albeit they are not numerous. There are no new notes struck, no adven tures in technique, and no new subjects, and the painters especially, have followed their old paths with skill,-if not enthusiasm. The Prize Winners The chief prize, the Carnegie, with its $500, went to Emil Carlsen for his charac teristic large coast scene "Surf at Skagen," j another of those largely conceived, low: toned atmospheric transcriptions of his native steely cold Scandinavian waters. This prize was won last year by John F. Carlson with his also large and well painted forest interior, "Winter Rigor." To Charles C. Curran was awarded the first Altman prize of $1,000 for his figure work "Top of the World," his accustomed soft colored and atmospheric depiction of a g'irl standing on the crest of a wind-swept hill. Nothing original, but the canvas is well painted. Victor Higgins won this prize last year with his New Mexican landscape and figure work "Fiesta Day." The second Altman prize of $500 was captured by Gif ford Beal with his "Balmy Days," again a repetition of an old motif-a summer day on the Hudson banks, with a steamboat l moored to the wharf and a group of women and men in summer attire strolling under the trees-a canvas ftill of life and move ment, but uninspiring. . Last year Leopold Seyffert won this prize with his large deco ration "The Lacquer Screen." The award of the Proctor prize of $200 for. the best portrait to Walter MacEwen for his three quarter length standing presentment of a well known artist, "The Painter," is the most judicious made by the Jury of Awards, as the work is incomparably superior to its it!ew fellows in the display-strongly drawn, admirable in pose-and expression and true and delightful in soft color. Louis B etts carried off this prize last year with his portrait of his wife. To R. McMillan went the Isidor gold medal for the best figure Qi X9OWAPDD YOUNG -GALLLPILS <;nmportailt Lxaxipks Ly AMEPICA:N FOPLIGN MASTERS ? 1 6~20 EifthcXCfleuC t e | b~~~~etweentg> 59'09SO5tSreefs j 1Iliew Yuiiillllliiiiinllorkillunioi a_ S Sff0 work by anl artist under 35, for his good pre sentment 'An Old Lady.' This prize was won last year by Adolphe W. Blondheim with his "Decoration." -Miss Laura Gardin Fraser won the Julia A. Shaw prize of $300 for the most meri torious work by a womnan witlh her sculp ture "A Baby Goat," and Rudolph Evans captured the Elizabeth Watrous gold medal for sculpture with his bronze "Boy and Pantlher," wlhile Victor D. Salvatore took the Helen Foster Barnett prize for the best sculpture with his bust of "Big Oak.' These sculpture prizes were won last year, respec tively, by Evelyn B. Longman with her statuette "The Future." Charles Grafly with his bust of Childe Hassam, and Jess M. Lawson with her 'Belgium, 1914," although the last award was recalled on1 account of the work having been previously exhibited. Few Portraits Shown The Winter Academy is never strong in portraiture, as the portrait painters find the winter seasoni just opening, their best time to catch and portray sitters, but this year the assemblage of portraits is meagre in deed and painfully low in standard. The best of the few showni are Edmund Grea cen's "Feather Fan," delicate in color and refined in treatment; Luis Mora's strong half length of "Fertuccio Vitale; Sydney F. Dickinson's half length of "Paul Arndt," a virile work; August Franzen's three-quar ter length seated presentment of an elderly man, characteristically strong and excel lent in expression; Robert D. Gauley's ad W1. ~ ~ ~ THE FRICK MANSION AND GALLERY Old Lenox Library Site Fifth Ave., 70-71 Sts. Bequeathed with contents to New York City mirable soft-colored, low-toned bust pre sentment of ex-Justice Grieve; Lydia F. Emmet's charming rich three-quarter length seated portrayal of a young woman, "Doris"; N an Watsons good presentment of "Miss Gladys Brown," Paul Moskowitz's excellent "Portrait of Clarence, Jr.," and Leon Kroll's striking, bold and appealing "Marian.' These are singled out for men tion in this first necessarily hasty review, but it is doubtful if others can be founed equally worthy of notice. I The Best Landscapes Landscapes, as usual, predominate in the Winter Academy. Howard Russell Butler's strong and well painted "Northern Lights Maine Coast, 1919," deservedly holds the place of honor in the centre of the Vander bilt Gallery north wall. The canvas is a tour de force, a very skiklful rendition of a difficult and unusual subject. In this gal lery the other landscapes which call most for notice are Cullen Yates' "Aquamarine," really a coast scene, beautiful and clear in color; Ernest Lawson's fine winter scene. "Icebound Falls"; Gardner Symons' typical winter scene, "Moonlit Village"; R. Strong Woodward's "Out of the Forest," C. S. Chapman's "Deserted Cabin," E. H. Pot thast's "Autumn Foliage," John F. Carl son's "Winter Caprice,' a change of miiotif and a strong depiction of a winiter scene ;, a city: Bruce Crane's "Late Autumni," WV Granville Smitlh's tonal and delightful "Ga EMILE PARES Importation et Exportation Objets d'Art, Tapisseries, Sculptures, Pierre, Bois, Meubles et Soieries. 15 QUAI VOLTAIRE - - PARIS Day," Edward Dufner's "September Stiun shinle," Carl Runigius' fine, largely conceived and well painted "Wyoming,' E. WV. Red field's River Landscape," W. S. Robinsoni's 'Coast of Maine" anid Bolton Jones' "A Berkshire Hill." Landscapes in the South and Centre Gal leries most worthy of note are Arthur Powell's "Moonirise, Rocky Mountains" lovely in color and feeling; W. H. Singer's 'Birches-Norway," Glenn Newell's "Peace and %uiet"-the best work from his able brush in many a day; Gregory Smith's "Lit tle Black Bridge," Ernest Albert's "Decem ber Afternoon," Maurice Braun's "Autumni Tints," Frank De Haven's "Indian Sumn mer," a fine performance; Gifford Beal's 'Rush of the West Wrind," W. J. Baer's "Woodland Pool," Belmore Brown's "St. Elias-Alaska," and Cullen Yates' "Indian Summner.' Marines and Figure Works The marines and figure works are few indeed, but include some good canvases, such as Leon Kronberg's delightful small "Ballet Girl in Blue," K. A. Buehr's large and well colored "Home and Hollyhocks," a work of much charm;; Colin Campbell Cooper's ."Summer"-again two girls in a boat, delicate and refined in color; Ray monid Neilsen's "White Parasol," most dec orative; Louis Riemen's "Interior," Karl Anderson's "Pegasus," Walter Ufer's strong New Mexican figure piece, "Their Audience'.'; Lillian Gerth's curious, but strong, "Old Man of the Winds," J. F. Folinsbee's "Sleeping Baby," F. C. Jones' "Fortune Teller," James R. Hopkinson's "Market Day in the Mountains," Victor Higgins' "Apaches," Edward Dufner's "September Sunshine," Ivan G. Olinsky's "Adoration," E. I. Couse's "Sun Worship pers;" and Hobart Nichols' "Joie de Vivre." The best marines are Jonas Lie's "Lifting Fog" and "Toilers of the Sea," W. S. Rob insons Coast of Maine," C. Morris Young's "Harbor," Henry B. Snell's "Stormy Breather" and Olaf Brauner's "Summer Coast Scene." The pictures in the Academy Room anid the sculptures must await another revievz, James B. Townsend. The Milch Galleries, 108 W. 57 St., are preparing to hold an exhibition of portraits by the Westerin painter, Royston Nave, who will thus be introduced to the N. Y. public The display will be open from Dec. 29 to Jan. 11. The Taos Society of painters anc1 sculptors will hold their annual exhibitior at these galleries from Jan. 17-31. Harriett Keithl Fobes is holding her annual holiday exhibition of hand-wrought jewelry at her Carnegie Hall studio, through the end of the month. "Jewelry Teas," are served on Fridays. She gave an interesting talk on "Jewelry" to an appreciative audi ence at the Art Alliance, on Thurs(lay last. -STUDIO FOUNDED ESTABLISHED IN NEW YORK IN 1840 SINCE 1907 ROUGERON - 94 Park Avenue, betwee 39th and 40th Streets i PICTURE RESTORATION Hlghest Referencesfrom Museums, Collectors and Picture Dealers JII u1llllllluFalllllllllll Illllllllllll II II IMI M I11u10 IIIIIII111II IIIIIIRIIII tII 4 101HMM464H NO IS; The Gorham Foundries give to the casting of life size, colossal and small statuary that painstaking and sympa thetic handling which alone in sures the most successful result. 4J Particular attention is being given to *the patining of statuettes. q The Gorham Galleries are a continual exposition of every thilng, new in contemporaneous sculptures. Correspondence Solicited THE GORHAM CO. FIFTH AVENUE andI 36th STREET NEW YORK Kronberg at Howard Young's Louis Kronberg is showing a delightful series of oils and pastels at the Howard Young Galleries, 620 Fifth Avenue, through the month. Some twenty representations of graceful ballerine iln varying poses and moods, each one telling its own story, and all living, sympathetic portrayals. These dancers are certainly good to look at, strong yet delicate in form, poetic concep tions brilliantly rendered in exquisite tones of blue, pink or yellow. It would be diffi cult to award the palm to any one of Mr. Kronberg's exhibits, but, if a distinction may be made, "Ballet Girl in Blue" deserves especial mention, while the charming pastel entitled "La Coiffure" cannot be over looked. "Grandmother," "L'Habilleuse" and "The Wardrobe Mistress" are very hu man documents. Admiraible technique andl harmonious color schemes are the rule and not the exception in this artist's brilliant work. Arthur Rackham's Watercolors The first American exhibition of water color drawings by Arthur Rackham, the well known English illustrator of famous books, opens at the Scott and Fowles Gal leries, 590 Fifth Avenue, to-day. These works, with their charm of sentiment, ac tion and beauty of color, should prove one of the season's greatest attractions. Such subjects as "The Romance of King Arthur," "English Fairy Tales," "Dickens' Christ mas Carol," "Wagner's Ring of the Nibe lung," "The Allies' Fairy Book," "Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens," "Aesop's Fa bles," "A Midsummer Night's Dream" and "Undine" are presented with rare charm. Carlton Fowler at Hotel Majestic Carlton Fowler's landscapes of France, Italy and America, some of which were shown last season at the City Club, are now on view at the Hotel Majestic Salon through December 20. They are fine in color and show a sincere love of nature. An old Venetian doorway has a charm of sentiment, and a landscape painted at Men tone, France. jUSt prior to the outbreak of the war, is lovely in tone and design. A recent painlting of "Riverside Drive" is at tractive, and "Leaning Tower, Venice," ha.s much individual charm. A collecti-on of "Camera Portraits" by "T'he Stewarts," who recently arrived from Europe, where they - were unusually successful, is another of the Salon's art features this week. "The Stew arts." it appea rs. have gone "artistically" further with o)hotography than almost an's other dependents on the camera. Their portraits of many high European digna tories are remarkably fine. LAI-YUAN & CO. C. T. LOO 557 Fifth Avenue, New Ytzk Chinese Antiques BRANCHES PARIS-SHANGHAI- PEKIN F , A \il V ,X I 1 t, A N A K' 1IN tIS W Di AMERICAN ART NEWS Entered as second-class mail matter, February 5, 1909 at New York Post Office under the Act, March 3, 1879. Published Weekly from Oct. 15 to June 1 inclusive Monthly from June 15 to Sept. 15 inclusive. AMERICAN ART NEWS CO., INC. Publishers 15-17 East 40th Street Tel. 7180 Murray Hill JAMES B. TOWNSEND. President and Treasurer, 15-17 East 40th Street REGINALD TOWNSEND. Secretary. 15-17 East 40th Street SUBSCRIPTION RATES YEAR, IN ADVANCE -3.00 Canada - - - - - - 3.35 Foreign Countries -3.75 Single Copies- .10 WHERE ART NEWS MAY BE OBTAINED IN NEW YORK Brentano's - - Fifth Ave. and 27th St. Powell's Art Gallery - - 983 Sixth Ave. WASHINGTON Brentano's - - - - F and 12th Streets MONTREAL Milloy's Book Store, 241 St. Catherine St. W. Chapman - 190 Peel St. LONDON Art News Office - 17 Old Burlington St. Bottom, News Agent, 32 Duke St., St. James, S. W. PARIS Chaine & Simonson - 19 Rue Caumartin Vol. XVIII. December 13, 1919. No. 8 CHANGE OF ADDRESS When a change of address is requested, both the new and old address should be given. Two weeks' notice is required for changing an address. ART AND BOOK SALE CATA TOGS-The American Art News, in connection with its Bureau of Expertis ing and Valuation, can furnish catalogs of all important art and book sales, with names of buyers and prices, at small charge for time and labor of writing up and cost of catalog when such are de luxe and illustrated. APPRAISALS-"EXPERTISING" The "Art News" is not a dealer in art or literary property but deals with the dealer and to the advantage of both owner and dealer. Our Bureau of "Ex pertising and Appraisal" has conducted some most important appraisals. A GREAT COLLECTOR PASSES We republish today our page story of March 16, 1915, entitled "Morgan Passes-Frick Arrives," with the first correct and complete list of his most important pictures, with recent acces sions, yet made public, believing with all modesty that this, the first adequate published story of the dead collector's career and coming inltO prominence as the lat'e Pierpont Morgan's only real successor as an art collector in Amer ica, gives the fairest possible estimate of his personality and achievements in the assembling of a famous art col lestion. The founding by M,r. Prick, as re vealed by his surprising generous wrill, (iof a G:allery and art collections in thle -American metropolis, which will be for .all time to New York and America wrhat the Wallace Gallery and collec tions are to London and England, and the wise and generous provision for their endowment, gives to his passing far more wvidespread and public in terest than it would otherwise have had. His death, while it affects thle *art trade, in that it means the failure 'on the part of prominent art houses to) 'transfer, even at present, to his estate, 't'he numerous great works which 't'hey secured in disorganized Europe of late, with the reasonable expecta 'tion of sale to Mr. Prick, still leaves t'hese' treasures availabDle to other. if 'lesser, American collectors, and so in all probDability, will not deprive thle country of them. But this is perhlaps 'too commercial a view of the effects of Mr. Prick's passing. His henefac tions, notably that of fifteen sorely -nee(ledl millions to Princeton, is topped 'o)T the perhaps not unexpected, b)ut munificelnt bequest of virtually a Wal lace Gallery and collection to the city of his adloption anid the country of his birth. Ag,ain, as one reads over the story of Mr. Frick's career, and contemplates the effect of the wise and generous bequests of xveaith that he amassed, here come to mind the two old, yet ever new,, sayings-the first paraphrased "The good men do lives after them," and "If you seek his monument, look arotund you." Julian Alden Weir Following the passing of a great I American art collector in Henry C. Frick, comes the departure from these earthly scenes of Julian Alden Weir, one of the most able painters this country has produced and one of the most lovable of men. The story of his successful life, and of the growth of his sympathetic and appealing poetic- art was so well and appreciative ly told by Mr. Cortissoz in Monday's N. Y. Tribune, that it would be super flous for us to atetmpt another de served eulogy. Suffice to say that in the death, of Julian Alden Weir, American art loses another of the too small band of- really eminent modern painters, that band headed by Inness, Wyant, Martin, Winslow, Homer and the only recently dead Duveneck. But Weir had a personality that none of his predecessors possessed i a geniality of temperament, a Jove-like head and face, which of itself inspired respect, and a smile that came from the heart. He had a Rooseveltian love of Nature and was never happier than when, rod in hand, he whipped the mountain streams for the wary trout. The ed itor of this journal will. never forget the spectacle of Weir's standing knee deep in a cold rushing Canadian river, his handsome face aglow with excite ment, the while he played for over an hour, and finally successfully landed, two large trout weighing respectively four and five pounds. And his out look on life was as sunny and broad as was his temperament. He belongee to the school of thought of Whistler. Dean Stanley, Canon Farrar and Phil lips Brooks, that school which had as its inspiration "God's Providence is mine inheritance," and through whose writings and utterances there blew the cold northwest wind, and which had the feeling of sunlight and cheer. veir was an optimist, and all things worked in him for the good of his fellows and the world in which hle lived. His best epitaph would be that of the old Greek on whose tomb was inscribed: "Here wrapped in happy slumber Cleon lies Asleep-riot dead-the good man never dies." LIST OF MR. FRICK'S PICTURES The estimated cost of the contents of the galleries has been placed at $30,000, 000, and their value at the present time is probably hi;gher. Early Dutch, Germnan and Flemish Masters Cuyp, Albert -"Sunrise on the Maas," Herdsmen and Cows on a River Bank," "River Scene with Barge and Passengers." David, Gerard-"Descent from the. Cross.''j Hobberna, Meindaert-"Viewr of a Wooded (Country," "Landscape." Hals, Prans-"Portrait of an Artist," "Portrait of a Man," "Portrait of an Old Wioman (Yerkes Coll'n)," "Por trait of a Burgomaster" (Miaurice Kann Coll'nl), Holbein-"Sir Thomas More," "Sir Thomas Cromwell." Metzu, Gabriel-"Lady in Blue." Rembrandt-"Portrait of the Artist," "Portrait of a Young Painter," "The Polish Rider," "Old Woman Reading a Book" (Porges Coll'n). Rubens-"Portrait Ambrogio Spin ola." Ruysdael, Jacob - "A Waterfall," "Harbor and Towvn." Terburg,, G.- "Portrait of a Lady." Wouvermans-"The Cavalry Camp." Van Dyck-"Paola Adorno-Mar chesa de Brignoli Sala," "Marchesa Gio vanna Cattaneo," "Signor Canevari," "Earl of Derby-Wife and Child," "Snyders, the Artist," "Wife of Snyders," "Portrait Sir John Suckling," "Portrait Lady Denbigh." Van de Capelle-"View of Dor drecht." Van Ostade, Isaak-"Halt at the Inn." Vermeer of Delft-"The Music Les-! son," "Soldier and the Laughing Girl," "The Love Letter" (Simon. Coll'n). Early Italian Masters Bronzino-"Portrait of a Medici." Bellini, Giovanni-"St. Francis in the Desert." Guardi, F.-"Scene on Canal-Ven ice," "Grand Canal-Venice." Da Messina, Antonello-"Deposition from the Cross." Veronese, Paolo -"Wisdom and! Strength," "Virtue and Vice." Titian-"Pietro Aretino," "Portrait Man in Red Cap." Early Spanish Masters Goya, F.-"The Forge," "Portrait Signora da Puga," "El Conde de Teba." El Greco-"St. Jerome," "Portrait Vincenzio Anastagi," "Christ Driving the Money-changers from Temple," "Portrait of a Cardinal.' Murillo-"Portrait of the Artist." Velasquez-"Philip IV." Early English Masters. Constable-"Salisbury Cathedral." Gainsborough - "M r s. Hatchett," "Lady Inness," "Lady's Anne Dun combe," "Pall Mall." Hogarth-"MIiss Mary Edwards." Hoppner-"Miss B'yng," "Ladies Sarah and Elizabeth BIigh." Lawrence-"Lady Peale," "Marquise de iBlaizel." Raeburn-"Mrs. Cruikshank," "Mr. Cruikshank." Reynolds-"Lady Margaret Beau mont,'" "Sir George Hiowland Beau mont," "Lady Skipworth," "Lady Eliz. Taylor." Romney- "La4y- Hamilton as Na ture," "Miss Frances Harford," "Miss Mary Finch Hatton,"t "Lady Warwick and Children,"X "Lady Milnes." Turner-"iFishing Boats Leaving Calais lHarbor," "Van Goyen Looking for a Sub)ject,"2 "Mortlake Terrace," 'Harbor of Dieppe," "Cologne-Arrival of a Packet Boat," "Regatta-"Beating: to Windwrard." Early French Masters Boucher -"The Four Seasons," "Twro Groups of Cupids." Lancret-"Two Landscapes and Fig ures." Nattier-"Portrait of Lady Eliz. Hamilton." Fragonard-"TI;e Du Barry Panels." Modern French Masters Corot-"Le Lac de Garde," "L.e Lac," "The Pond," "Ville d'Avray.' Daubigny-"Dieppe," "The Washer women." Degas- "The Rehearsal." Diaz-"The Pond of Vipers," "Love's Caresses," "The Plain," "Nymphs Bathing." Dupre, J}.-"The River." Manet--'"The Bullfight." Monet, Claude-"Seine at Lavacour." Millet-2"La Femme 'a la Lampe." Renoir-"Woman and Children." Rousseau-"Village of Becquigny," "Edge of Woods." Troyon-"Pasturage ini Normandy,". "Landscape." Ziem, F.-"French Garden-Venice." Modern Dutch Masters Maris, Jakob-"The Bridge," "View of Amsterdam." Israels, Josef. -"Cottage Interior." American Masters Whistler-"Rosa Corder," "Count Robert de Montesquiou," "Valparaiso." Stuart, Gilbert-"The Camperdown'" Bust Portrait of Washington." _L~J rINf r sWlh|s W o LONDON LETTER Dec. 3, 1919. November proved itself a most sensa tional month from the saleroom point of view, as record after record was surpassed, not by small sums but by thousands. First there was the purchase at the Hamilton House Sale at Christie's of the "Beckford Children" by Romney, by Messrs. Duveen presumably for America, for the amazing sum of ?54,600, a figure which has left all previous prices for this master miles behind. The firm, it is said, were anxious to secure the picture some years ago, but at the time the late Duke of Hamilton could not eventu ally make up his mind to part with it. Then came the sale of the -"St. Eustace" of Carpaccio at the Wentworth Castle Sale, to Mr. - Sulley, for ?33,160, on which Mr. Arthur Ruck was the "runner-up." This picture, which at one time was ascribed to Durer, created the greatest enthusiasm among- bidders for it is rarely that an ex ample by this master comes on the mar ket, the last some eight years ago, when a Pieta belonging to Sir William Abdy, brought about a third of the price paid for the present example. The fact that Carpaccio was one of the first artists to paint in oils may have helped to exalt his price to this pinnacle ! Among a large number of other prices, worthy of note, was that of 4,800 gns., paid at the same Sale for a Charles II. oak balustrade by Mr. Jacques Seligmann, who made a special journey from Paris for the sale, chiefly on account of the Louis Quinze suite of a set tee and six fauteuils, covered in Beauvais tapestry designed to illustrate certain of Aesop's fables, and for which he paid ?4,620. He also secured an early Soho tapestry panel designed by Saunders, an artist who acquired the principles of his craft from- the French refugees. As a contrast to all these stupendous sale prices may be mentioned the sale at the Hamilton auction of a number -of Winterhalter portraits of royal personages at trivial sums, which a -contemporary has estinmated as representing about eight shillings per square foot of canvas. Statesman Turns Artist The interest, attaching to the current ex hibition of the Society of Portrait-Painters at the Grafton Galleries is- of a social rather than an artistic character, for if one excepts a- rather arresting work by Ranken of Scotch peasants, and some elfin-like draw ings by Kitty shannon, the exhibits on the whole seem to imply that their authors-have overlooked that there is such a thing as -a modern movement in art. A good deal of interest centres in the portrait of Sir John Lavery by Winston Churchill, in which the artist is -depicted by the statesman at work -in his. studio. Despite- a certain rather un tutored force in the painting, one cannot but sympathize with the -lady who, when asked at the private view for her opinion of the work, confessed that she would prefer to have seen a portrait by Sir John Lavery of Winston Churchill! As no exhibition is considered complete nowadays without a portrait of England's official beauty, Lady Diana Duff-Cooper, there are two pictures of her in this exhibition, both showing her clad in the wedding robes when she mar ried Mr. Duff-Cooper. The canvas by: Shannon, although rather empty in char acterization, has nevertheless a delicate charm. Tooths Return to New York I hear -that Messrs. Arthur Tooth and sons, whose gallery in Old B ond. St., has long been a landmark in London after some years, are to soon again open a gallery in New York, taking over that formerly occupied by F. Kleinberger, and Co., at 709 5th Ave. The new gallery iis to be under the management of Mr. Labbie, and all good wishes from his many friends over here accompany him ~in his new post. M r. Arthur- Tooth will probably go over to N. Y. in January. Some Interesting Shows One interesting exhibition follows uponl the heels of another although the Nevinsonl exhibition is still attracting hosts of ad mirers to the Leicester Galleries, another room has been opened -wi-th pictures by Matisse, who has himself been in London, supervising their arrangement. This is the first "one-man" show of this artist's work that London has yet hiad although single examples at various exhibitions have made his style familiar to British, art-lovers. Whether one finds Matisse's methods sym pathetic or the reverse, it is impossible to deny the extraordinary and compelling foree wvhich he brings to his creations, nor the haunting power which they seem to possess. A portrait study of-three girls, for instance, strikes one at first as being vaguely coarse an-d unpleasant, yet its impression remains with one long after and is found much more lasting than that of canvases, more smoothly pleasing. A number of drawings and statuettes by Maillol exemplify unusual qualities -of craftsmanship, the economy of line in the drawings being as excellent as the purity of modelling in the figures. L. G-S. CHICAGO At the Art Institute the anniounced pur chases by the Friends of American Art meet witn the general satisfaction of critics ana puolic. (Naturally one would have expected Leon Kroll's achievement, which won him the 1'rank G. Logan medal, to oe on the list). lhe Ornstein portrait will be an important addition to the Institute's portraits. ' unrest,' vy bicney t. .JlcKin son, a superior studio niude, is another of the F riends' purchlases. It is a work of distinction, with rich color in agreeable arrangement, and is a study of youthful loveliiess witru the element ot character. The other two purchases depict activities and scenes of modern life in a decorative .-aLner tnan a general way. "I he Cotton Gin," by Harry L. Hoffman, is distinctly romantic and beautiful despite its subject, a machine surrounded by colored women. "Evening," by J erome Meyers, portrays ilis tavorite lower -N. Y. n-ast side at twi light. In Dealers' Galleries Fred Grant's show at Carson, Pirie, Scott and Co.'s resulted in eight sales, all of the most important canvases. This was to have been expected, as the collection was replete with graceful, romantic, decora tive works. The flower pieces were nota Die for brilliance and quality. These galler ies have recently received three very im portant Rangers, two superior samples of Ballard Wililams, a fine Hawthorne and Murphy, and some rarely good examples of Daudigny, Van Marcke and Wyant. From the Emerson exhibition at the rhurber Galleries there have been several record sales. l ht collectlon deserved this tribute, as the artist surpassed in it all for mer achievements. Mr. Emerson will re main here for the winter. An exhibition oy . Sigurd Schau replaced the Emerson show in these galleries. Mr. Schau is an eastern man who came here to make his nome, and his work is notable for brilliant and 'beautiful color splashes and rare under standing of pure decoration. The artist is an effective painter, much favored by' orother artists. These galleries report the activities of Robert Grafton, the portrait painter, who makes his headquarters here,G and who is working on two important com missions. Mr. W. J. Young's "bidding" sale has pro gressed with marked activity. The first, and second sales were of Bundy's works, to Phila. and Los Angeles buyers, re spectively. Alfred Janisson's works have also been popular in this sale, which brought the turn over of an Inness. Local collectors of note have frequented the gal leries making bids on the various offerings, and carryiiig some ot them oft in triumph. iDesigned as a popular feature the sale has I been rather a surprise in the way it has attracted regular collectors and connois seurs. Exhibitions Now On An exhibition of the works of Oldrich Farsky is on at the galleries of Marshall Field and Co., and three sales marked the opening afternoon and five were consum mated during the first week. Every one who knows the artist both here and in Aurora,. his home, is pleased to see him thus "come into his own." He has painted; long and conscientiously, attracting of late the patronage .of Aurora's connoisseur, Mr.l James M. Cowan. Through the efforts of the latter, the merits of the man have been brought to the attention again of a public that is all too prone to forget. Dur-l ing his residence in Aurora, Mr. Farsky ilas deveioped a freer, looser manner of painting, and this added to his understand ing of color and appreciation of the quiet beauty of simple rural landscape has re sulted~ in works which have a distinctly! ' homey" charm. The exhibition at Field'si is made up of his recent studies in pictur esque Brown County, Indiana. The artist is a Serbian by birth andf received his early art training in Prague.. He will spend the winter in California. The exhibition at the Art Institute of XVIII Century furniture, tapestries and paintings from France is quite the most imposing and elegant array of this kind ever male here. Beauvais tapestries after designs by B oucher;* paintings by David. LeBrun, and Watteau, with sculptures -by Moudan, are included. The Arts Club is also showing early American furniture in connection with its exhibition of old portraits. The toy show of the Art Alliance of! America is on at the Institute. It is the most important and significant of all the Alliance exhibitions so far. Evelyn Marie Stuart. Henry R. Poore, the well-known artist, has been asked to have his books on Art translated into Spanish. "Pictorial Com position," "The Con-ception of Art," and "New Tendencies in Art," are the works in question. Several years ago, a similar re quest was made to Mr. Moore by a group !Of Holland artists for a translation of "Pic Itorial Composition." PARIS LETTER Paris, Dec. 3, 1919. Despite the earliest winter weather that France has been afflicted with in many a year, with the streets for some days deep in sniow, a coal tamine, a scarcity of cabs, the 'buses and ilMetro. so crowded that get tinig about is a difficult task, at times almost impossible, the city overcrowded, and hotel accommodations overtaxed, there is yet un wonted activity in the Art world at this 'off" season. The same result has come to France as to England as an aftermath of the War, namely, the coming into the mar ket of the possessors of numerous new for-' tunes, in quest of Art objects of all kinds, so that prices are mounting higher every" day and accomplished collectors and conInoisseurs, who have held on to their capital, are themselves becoming buyers, for inivestment, as they estimate that prices will go still higher, and because the high prices now prevailing have brought out from their hiding places in old chateaux and houses, treasures that it had never been thought would be exposed to public view, or even find a place in dealers' galleries. In the Exhibition Galleries The larger exhibitions of late have been the Salon d'Automne at the Grand Palais, a unique and beautiful display of old stained: glass, removed from 1 rench churches and cathedrals for preservation during the War, and arranged in the Petit Palais for exhi bition before being put back in their old homes, and the much heralded exhibition of contemporary American Ipictures at the Luxembourg. The Salon d'Automne, the first held since 1913, is, I regret to say, worthy only of scant mention. It had been thought, after five' years of abstention, in many cases, forced abstention, from art production on the part of the younger French painters, that when this Autumn- Salon was resumed, there would be some departure, at least, from the several Autumn Salons before the War, which were simply an output of the so-: called "Modernist' painters and sculptors, and of their various Allied "faddists."' But, save tor the fact that there is a refreshing absence of the numberless vulgar and dis gusting portrayals of 'the nude that used to characterize the Autumn Salon- with very Few exceptions, the pictures shown are simply a repetition of those of former years. Some of the sculpture is clever, but there are hardly five pictures in the dreary waste of canvases that cover the walls of half the big galleries in the Grand Palais, and which in the bitter weather of the last few weeks have had the temperature of a mortuary vault, at all worthy of mention. The exhibi tion has produced no new works of promise and strikes no new note. Pictures, or so -ailed pictures, crude and unnatural in color, iistorted in drawng meet the visitor's eye' at avery turn, and one wonders what could hiave been the motives that impelled their production. And yet I am -told there is a good market for this so-called "art" in Paris, among a limited number of buyers, and that one or two dealers have actually Yrown rich in handling these goods. If this be so there is, of course, an explana tion for the Autumn Salon, but otherwise not. The American Luxembourg Display I wish I could speak well of the Ameri can exhibition at the Luxembourg, which has faile'd to excite or even interest the art lovers of Paris, but- to my surprise and disappointment, for the list of names of artists to be represented in this display as. given out in N. ,Y. last Sprinlg had led one to suppose that it would be an unusually good, and certainly a most representative show of modern American painting, it falls Far short of any such expectation. Something must have-~gone wrong for it would be hard to imagine,, to those familiar with 'modern American- painting at its best,' a more unsatisfactory exposition of such painting. In the first place the American painters resident in Paris, good artists as they are, but almost.all of whom have been and are naturally under French influence, dominate the entire show. One cannot criticise ad versely th~ work of such men as Alexander Harrison, H. 0. Tanner, Walter Gay, the late Jules Stewart, W. T. Dannat, LioMnal Walden, Alfred Gihon, et. al., but none of these, or their fellows ar:e distinctively American painters, in the sense that they represent American art of today, as it is produced at home,~ while those compara tively recent products of Paris studios, Richard Miller and F. C. Frieseke,-have far too many canvases in proportion. The Scandinavian Johansens are to the fore, and while there are several of Red Field's 'Winter landscapes, and examples of such good painters as Bruce Crane, John F. Carlson, Emile Carlsen, Howard R. Butler, Paul Dougherty, Cecilia Beaux, De Witt Lockman, Louis Betts, et. al., I looked in vain for an example of J. Francis Murphy and of many clever American landscape, figure and portrait painters, who after all, and despite adverse criticisms of the N. Y. and Phila. Academy shows, do make these,l on the whole, representative of modern American painting. Robert McCameron's strong "Absinthe Drinkers," m o r e French than American in feelinig, as befits Its SUDJect, occupies a prominent place and very properly, Llhat picture of pictures" "'Whistler s portrait of his Mother" which beioIngs to tne Luxembourg itself, has been lett unidisturbed and is really the clue of the American display. The tallure to get together in Paris a really representative exhibition of modern Americani painting is in no way the fault, I am told, of W. A. Coffin and his fellows who organized the display, but is, I fear, due to the failure of those artists who were chosen, to send really representative works, and to possibly, some intiuence from those painters who were disgruntled at be ing lett out of the chosen tew. News of the Dealers The retirement of M. Rene Gimpel from the firm of E. Gimpel and Wildenstein, in which he succeeded his father, at the 'lat ter's death a few years ago, has led to the report that he will soon become associated with Duveen Bros. I can find no confirma tion of this at the Duveen Galleries here, anid the report is probably due to the fact that Nr. Gimpel married a few years ago the sister of Sir Joseph Duveen. It is also reported that Mr. Edward Brandus is no longer associated with the Wildenstein firm. Among the newer galleries of Paris are those of Mr. E. M, Hodgkins adjoining the Northwest corner of the Rue de Berri and the- Champs Elysees. Mr. Hodgkins has transformed the large private hotel, which he recently bought on this site, into a series of most beautitully proportioned, well lit and yet simply and richly appointed gal leries, in which are shown some of most beautiful old Sevres sets, rare old furni ture and a few choice early English and 1 rench pictures-notably one of the most important Reynolds known,- and two superior Lawrences. All these are ar ranged with Mr. Hodgkins' well known taste. Two remarkable exhibitions have recently been held at the Chaine and Simonson Gallery in the Rue Caumartin, which have attracted the cognoscenti, one of a number of portraits and still lifes by Edmund Suau, a pupil of Benjamin Constant and Jules Lefevre, an unusually strong painter. His portrait of Mme. Crainquebille, and his family group portrait prove him to be a man of unusual power, while his still lifes are the best by a modern painter I have seen since those of Vollon, unusually rich in color arid beautifully painted. The other exhibition was that of the Society calling itself "Les Peintres en l'Eau." This in cluded the work of some of the best painters in aquarelle, gouache and pastel in Paris, but the features of the display were the several examples of the splendid work of Lucien Simon-that most virile painter. Coming Art Sales It is too early, as yet, for large sales it auction, but among the daily offerings at the Hotel Drouot may be found many a -hoice bibelot, rare picture or print, or superior tapestry. The auctioneers tell me that they have already booked some sales For the early Winter, and especially for next Spring, which will surely bring buyers and bids from all parts of Europe, and even from America, while others are be ing booked every week, although final ar rangements for them have not as yet been made. On Dec. 8 and 9 at the Georges Petit Gallery, M. Lair-Dubreuil will sell a :ollection of art objects and XV century tapestry, formed by the late M. Pasteur Goulden and on Dec. 15 and 16 at the Manzi Gallery, he will hold the 3rd session of the Manzi collection of art objects XV century tapestries and stone sculptures of the XV and XVI century. M. Baudoin will be associated with him in this sale. Other ,ales which M. Lair-Dubrenil will hold,in the near future, and which will be of in terest to your readers, are those of modern pictures of the Barbizon school principally, belonging to several amateurs, at the Georges Petit Galleries, Dec. 16 and 17, of important modern pictures and XV century Furniture owned by the late M. Bergeaud, at the same galleries on March 1 and 2, 1920, and of some remarkable jewels owned by the late M. Leo Weill at the Hotel Drouot on Dec. 15 and 16. The Prince Orloff Sale The most important sale of those an riounced for the early Spring will be that of the primitives, old masters- and twenty Irawings. by Tiepolo, forming the collec tion of the late Prince Orloff, which will be sold by M. Lair-Dubreuil some time luring March; of the important collection of modern pictures, formed by M. Wil helms, chiefly of the Barbizon school, at the Georges Petit Galleries on May 3, with MJM. Lair-Dubreuil and Baudoin as auc tioneers, and of old masters, old furniture and art objects of the XVIII century on MVay 10 and 11 by MM. Lair-Debreuil and Baudoin, at the same galleries. It is in mnored that two or three of the most noted art collections in France will also come on :he market before next Summer's vacation. t- i BOSTON During December the gallery of the Bos ton Art Club is occupied by works of New England painters, which make a distin guished show, thanks to the taste exehcised *by the selecting committee. John Sargent is represented by one of his serene, pene tratingly observed portraits in oil, "Rose Marie," and his "Camping in the Rockies," a souvenir of a holiday. Dodge Mac Knight's "Snow in the Country," an oil, has. the same color and form illusion he achieves so brilliantly in his watercolors. Arthur C. Goodwin, as a change from the green and blue compositions that have oc cupied him so much of late, has a Monti celil glow in "The Golden Moment." Charles H. Davis again catches season and place in the gray nuances of "Winter." "Girl in Blue," by Ettore Caser, is a tender handling of a gentle subject. George H. Hallowell's landscape, "King's Ravine," is admirable in emotional mood and masterly handling of pattern. "Springtime," by Elizabeth W. Roberts; two landscapes by Theodore Coe;; "Snow," by E. A. Webster; "Jamaica Fishermen," by Clifford W. Ash ley, and "Glass Bowl of Rose," by Laura Coombs Hill-s, are other highlights in the show, all are characteristic works. Watercolors by James Blomfield are- or view at a local gallery. J. Eliot Enneking is holding an exhi bition of his landscapes in his late father'" studio. The Brush and Chisel Club, an organiza tion of young Boston painters and sculp tors is holding an exhibition at 10 Museurrm Road. The fourth annual exhibition of the Concord Art Association drew a more varied entry list than marks most art shows in New England. Painters and workers in black and white of N. Y. and Ph-ila. are well represented on the walls among artists of Bos'ton and vicinity. An outstanding exhibit is Daniel Chester French's fountain figure, "The Spirit of Life," executed for the Spencer Trask Memorial at Saratoga. Other sculptors represented iniclude: Mal vina Hoffman, Albert Laessle, Anna Vaughn Hyatt, Anna Coleman Ladd and Richard Recchia. Among the paintings, Childe Hassam's "In the Shadow of the Vines," a landscape by Edward W. Red field, ,one of Sargent's Canadian woodland ske':tches, Charles Hopkinson's "Winter Morning" and Elizabeth Wentworth Rob ert's -"Springtime," are worthy of note. Other painters *represented include: Ger ritt A. Beneker, Richard E. Miller, Fred erick C. Frieseke, Violet Oakley, Leopold Seyffert, Robert Henri, Charles W. Haw thorne. Among kthe etchings are: Mary Cassatt's "Child Seated," bought by the Concord Art Association for its permanent collection; four Parisian studies by Frank Brangwyn, and five drawings by Elizabeth -Shippen Green Elliott. Fifteen paintings by Twachtman are be ing exhibited by R. C. & N. M. Vose, for the most part loans, and all are good examples. "March" is a fine canvas in which the artist has given one the sense of ..green things pushing behind the veil of pink that marks the first warmilng of the sap in the trees and bushes. Portraits by Margaret Richardson are on view at the Copley Gallery. The study of Ar'.thur Goodwin is the most compelling i-n the gallery. Four pencil sketches, delicately forceful character studies of negroes and old Yankees, show this artist at the top of her bent. New etchings by Zornl are being shown at a Newbury streest gallery. -John F. Paramino is showing sculpture at the Guild of -Boston artists. Quite the most agreeable of the Guild Gallery exhibits is a group of Arthur Spear's pastel portraits of children. The Provinceto~wn Art Shop, 410 Boylston Street, is the -latest of -Boston's art stores. Etchings, block prints, Batiks and hand-dyed articles are on exhibition. The retrospective Gari Melchers show at the Boston Art C:lub, under the auspices of the Copley Society, is a huge success for a pay exhibition. E. C. Sherburne. OMAHA The art season here promises more than usual for the coming year. The Omaha Fine Arts Socie&ty has had anl exhibition -at the Fontenelle Hotel of paintings assembled by R. C. and N. M. Vose of Boston, including some of the best in their collection. The Society will have a chil dren's exhibit in December, and in January will show 24 canvases by Redfield and Tarbell, and at the same time 20 small bronzes from Gorham's. A library of prints of famous pictures has been started in Fthe school in the foreign section, pic-l tures being loaned for a month on the plan of library books. Mr. James M. Beck lectured here on after-war policies early in November; Coningsby Dawson, on Nov. 21, and others are to follow. The Omaha Art Guild held its seventh anlnual exhibit of members' work at the Public Library. Leta Moore Meyer.| ARTISTS' NOTES Louise Heustis recently gave a tea at her studio, 53 E. 56 St., during which a num L)er ot ner recent porLraits were on exhibitioni. A presentment or Mlrs. J ohii Woodruft was of especial interest, show ing the character anti cnarm o r tne sitter. Mrs. B. Parker, painLcd Curing tne summer a:t Newport, ii, a stllmmering wLiLte satlli gown, was much atlnired. And there was a delignttul portrait ot the little daughter of b'rederick Kahn, wiiose red hair againsL a b-lue background was a brilliant success. James P. Ryon, wiio lived in Paris foi a numijer or years pr-ior to tile outbreak of thie war, where ike was a successru. portrait painter, returned to this country ancd enIIs'eLC in :tie \v >X- uepartirient wnierL ne served until atter trie s,.glliIg ot :the armistice. tie has recently cu;ne back to | N. Y. and has taken a studio al Z6 ft. 491 St., wnere he has just completed a good portrait of Mliss Marjorie Brown oI 1 aris, and a stunning presentment of Mrs. Ueorge C. Thomas o0 l-hila. Hayley Lever, who spent the summer painting at Gloucester, ivLass., has returned to his studio in the (linton, W. 42 St. kie has been engaged this season to teach at ihe Art Students League, Susan Ricker Knox painted portraits dur ing the past summer al Y ork tiarbor, ivie. She is settled for the winter at her studio in the National Arts Bldlg., m,. 19 :)., wiltrt she will soon begin por:tralt commissions. Colin Campbell Cooper and Emma Lam bert Cooper, who paiiited at Nantuci%et, R. I., from June until Uctober, are settieti for the winter in tne Gainsborough Bldg., W. 59 St. Edward Duflner Spenlt the summer at Baersville, where he painted several of 'his joyous, high keyed subjects of children at play., He has returnea to his Van Dyck studio. I, Henning Ryden who spent the greater part of tne summer painting portraits at Mendham, N. J., has returned to New York and is settled for the winter at 186 E. 72 St. Alphaeus Cole painted portraits and laiidscapes at Arden, Del., during the sum mer and early autumn. He returned a few weeks ago to his studio, 27 W. 67 St. George De Forrest Brush is settled for the winter in the Sherwood, where he is at work on an important canvas destined for a well known collection. Alta E. Wilmot, who spent the summer painting at Woodstock, has returned to her Van.dyck studio, where she is at work on some interesting portraits. Edward H. Blashfield, who has been ill for several months, is recovering anid will soon be able to resume work at his Carnegie Hall studio. Museum Loses Vanderbilt Pictures The large loaned collecfion of modern foreign pictures, owned by Mrs. George Vanderbilt and which have filled for so many years one of the large side Gallieries at the Metropolitan Museum, that visitors have naturally assumed they had become the propery of the Institution, has been withdrawn, it is to be hpoped, only tem porarily, by Mrs. Vanderbilt. THE JOHNSON COLLECTION Two hearings have been heid by M. Hampton l ocia, the master appointed by l the Urpllans' (.ourt to take icstimony in reference to the pernianelit instaiiationfl the jon-nson Collection o0 Art oequeatheci to this city and clearly provided' ror in th,. decedent's last will an(i testament, wnicL. expresses the wish that the collection be housed in tne Johnson residence on bouti, Broad Street. 'l'he local Art J ury is seek ing by prayer to the Court to nave that provision set aside, claiming that it is un wise and inexpedient to cary it out, owing to the unsuitable character of the buila ing and its lack of fire-proof construction I'his seems quite reasonable, but in the meantime the Orphans' Court refuses to grant the petition until the parties present ing it can show that' they can provide a separate gallery for the assembling as a permanent exhibition, open to the public, of the entire collection. Witnesses ex amined at the hearing brought out the fact thata the old building was without doubt a tire trap and that the expense of recon struction for purposes of an art gallery and the erection of an annex would oe as great as that of an entire new building. It is pro posed to sell the Johnson residence in order to realize part ot the fund necessary for a gallery in some other location. Some pro gress was in prospect when at one of the hearings Mr. Eli K. Price, a member of the Art Jury and Vice President *of the Park Commission, stated that the site for a new gallery would be donated by the Com mission. It was also stated at the hearing that $150,000 had been offered for the John son residence, and also that the assessed value for taxation purpose was only $75,000. While all this is being discussed the col lection sleeps in obscurity in the New Cen tuiry Storage House, under very expensive charges for storage, insurance and curator's salary, not to mention the cost of employ ment of legal talent necesary to solve the problem. The tax-ridden people of Phila. will be obliged to foot the bills with no probability that they will ever view their property in the near future. MINNEAPOLIS The collection of American Indian bas kets, presented to the Art Institute, and -brought together by the late Mrs. George H. Christian, forms a unique exhibit. The designs are symbolic and show many beau tiful colors, especially the feather decora tion-s made by the Pomos. The annual exhibition of local painters, sculptors and designers showed diversity of endeavor and originality. A recent gift to the institute by Mr. George A. Goddard of Boston comprises en gravings, etchings and books of the mid XIX century period. The print room is showing Blake's Book of Job illustrations. The exhibition of the "post-impressionists," loaned by the courtesy of Mr. Daniel ot N. Y. is a striking example of the ultra modern. A beautiful collection of -textiles, silks and brocades manufactured by Cheney Bros. shows choice designs, color and work mnanship. The lectures illustrative of periods given by Mr. Rossiter Howard have been enthusiastically received. M. C. W. 'John S. Sargent is still in Boston, wherc he is painting his decorations in relief for the Boston Museum.' Dorothy Litzinger (Mrs. Thompson) re cently showed her work at her studio, 3 XVr 50 St. EXHIBITIONS & SALES AT THE ANDERSON GALLERIES PARK AVENUE &f 59th STREET. NEW YORK EXHIBITIONS OPEN WEEK-DAYS 9-,6, SUNDAYS 1-5 P. M. To le so7d Thursday, Friday and Satuirday Afternoons, December 18, 19, 20, at 2:30 A FINE COLLECTION OF ENGLISH, SPANISH, ITALIAN AND FRENCH FURNITURE, RUGS, SILVER, TAPESTRIES AND MISCELLANEOUS ART OBJECTS THE PROPERTY OF MRS. HENRY L. BURNETT AND MR. E. S. ULMANN OF NEW YORK AND OTHER OWNERS AND ESTATES Sa7es Conlucted by Mr. FREDERICK A. CHAPMAN PHILADELPHIA There is now on view at the Rosenbach 3alleries an interesting collection of minia .ures by CLnarles 'l urrell, a well known English painter, who has exhiibited Iiis ,vorK at tne Royal Academy and also iii LC'. Y. The subjects of the portraits are ?rominent peopie on both sides of the At Lantic. Prizes at Academy Shows The Dana -Gold Medal for the best group Af pictures painted in pure aquarelle' i.n ;he current Academy Exhibition was Lwarded to Alfred Haward, a member of che Philadelphia Watercolor Club, and a former student in the Academy schools. ro Lieut.-Commander Henry Reuterdahl, U. S. N., was awarded the 'Beck Prize or P100 for the best work reproduced in color, 'Destroyer Patrol." Childe Hassam re -eived the "Philadelphia Prize" of $200 of fered by "the friends of watercolor" for his "Rockport Quarry, Series." Mrs. Emily Drayton Taylor won the' bronze Medal of Honor for her miniature portrait of Gifford A. Cochran, J'r. For line drawings in black and white the Charles MI. Lea first prize went to J'ohn HIienry Crosman, second to .1usan A. Jones. The Chester Springs Sumer School Prizes went to Joseph T. Caddy, to Lieut. Alfred V. Greene and to Emile Walters. Two additional prizes pre sented by the Charlemagne Tower were awarded respectively to Miss-Dorothy Root Schell and Jules (iotlieb. The Plastic Club has on its annual exhi bition of pictures and art and craft work to Dec. 28. They are mainly small .can vases, but interesting and- sparkling with bright color. Mrs. Catherine F'arrell has an attractive group of landscapes. Florence Bradway' a. number -of '"im pressions" of nature, Paulette Van Rockens a well' done facade of an old cathedral, Arrah Lee 'Gaul a bit of Ravello, Juanita Smith a good watercolor of the seashore, and Fern CopRedge a delightful autumnal iandscape. BUFFALO Three special exhibitions, one of the work of "American Painters, . Sculptors ' and Gravers" of Miniatures by -the American Society of Miniature Painters and . a Memor'ial exhibition' of Italian Watercolors by Frtderic Crowninshield are now on at tne Albright Gallery.' 'fhe Society of American Painters, Sculp tors and Gravers is an-entirely independent Society of *Artists, whose members have felt that art is good or bad, without respect co- tht school which fostered it and thus there are in the present exhibition examples apparently foreign to each other in style and method, but akin 'in the quality' of the message. Nearly all tht forty odd mem bers are represented by at least one ex ample. There are, 100 oils, drawings, pas tels, and watercolors, 16 sculptures and 17 etchings and engravings, included. The exhibition of the American Society of Miniature painters is interesting, and the miniatures-in this collection are choice and well handled. The Memorial exhibition of Italian water colors by Frederic Crownshield consists argely of the Italian -work 'of his later i,ears, including many studies made in Cala )ria and Sicilly. The non-Italian -sub'jects are almost wholly ' from stockbridge which ,was Mr. Crowninshield's residence in this country. Antiques at Bonaventure's. The exhibition of XVIII century Objectc Df Art and Vertu at the B onaventure galS leries, 601 Fifth Ave., is a unique display of rare old fans, watches, miniatures, porceS lains, clocks, enamels,' artistic furniture drawings, paintings and first editions o' English and Amer-ican authors. There ic an unusual sand bust of Madam Du Barry by Pajou. said to be one of the finest by this artist. Two fine drawings by Bouchei add to the importance of the collection, and an oil portrait of Comte de Rochambeau and a companion piece of Colonels 'des Seufses and Grisons, both by an unknown artist of the early XVIII century, are espe cially good. A miniature by Isabey of thf Duke of Wellington is one of the chieX attractions, and there is a terra cotta Ba'c chus by Clodion, e Sevres, plaque portr'ail of Marie Antoinette, 'a Falconet model Louis XVI clock; a Chantilly porcelain and numerous other interesting objects of .th4 same period. Museums F?ree Ar~. Lectures Free lectures given at the 'Metropolitai Museum follow: Dec. 13, 4.00 p. m. "The Architecture od Ravenna," John Shapley; Dec. 14, 3.00 p. m Story-Hour: "A Persian Rug -Speaks," AInm C. Chandler; Dec. 14, 4.00 p. m. "Japa nese Painting," Howar'd - Mansfield. Edmund Greacen 'who spent over twc years in France with the American fighting forces, has returned and has, resumed his painting. Pi d 7 -lR ILIA-N I I EXHIBITIONS NOW ON French Art Display at Museum The delays in the shipment of the col lection of modern Frenchi pictures have at last been overcome, and the exhibition will open at the Museum with a reception on Monday evening next, and will be open to the public daily through to Feb. 1 next. This exhibition, organized in Paris by the French Ministry of Public Instruction and the Fine Arts, with the co-operationi of *the artists' association known as the Trien nale, consists of contemporary Frenck paintings, sculptures, drawings, prints, and -examples of the decorative arts, all selected as representative of the French art of today. The interest the French authorities have taken in sending it to America may he judged fromi the fact that it is forwarded at the Government's expense, and that it comes here under the patronage of the President of the French Republic, the Am bassador of France at Washington, the Minister of Public Instruction and Fine Arts, and the Director General of the French Services in the U. S., who has charge of its arrangements in this country. A review of the exhibition will be pub lished next week. Bouchor's War Paintings When a group of prominent New York society women undertake to promote the success of an art exhibition there is proof of "Art in America" reaching out and grasp ing the interest and attention of the class of patrons it has long essayed to command. The opening of the Exhibition of "Paint ings of The Allied Armies in The Great War," by J. F. Bouchor, Chevalier de la Legion d'Honneur, Official Painter to The French Armies from 1914 to 1919, at the Anderson Galleries, 59 St. and Park Ave., on Dec. 5, recalled the opening receptions oftheNationalAcademyexhibitions in Lon don. It was due to the efforts of such well known women as Mrs. Hugh Auchincloss, Mrs. Nicholas Murray Butler, Mrs. Thomas Lamont, Mrs. Julian Robbing, Mrs. Herbert Satterlee, Mrs. Isaac Untermyer, Mrs. William Sheehan, Mrs. Myron Hill, Mrs. Edward McVictor, Mrs. Henry Clay Frick. Mrs. McDougall Hawkes, Mrs. William Fahnstock and many others equally im portant, under the guidance of Mr. Grant, that the initial gathering was such a brilliant affair, and through their continued interest crowds still throng the galleries to see this -unusual collection of some two hundred paintings, all historical records of the great conflict. Mons. Bouchor was appointed official war painter by the French Government early in 1914, beginning with Alsace and following thence the various fronts of the Allied Armies. Scenes depicting operations at the battles of the Marne, Verdun, The Somme -and Italy have been recorded with great respect to detail. During the years preceding the outbreak of the war, the artist was known through *out Europe as a landscape and portrait painter and many of the works now dis -played show the influence of this early training. Thus, his portraits of all of the leading dignitaries, generals and diplomats, represented with evident seeking after subtle indications of personal characteris *tics. King Albert, President Poincare Premier Clemenceau, Marshal Foch, Marshal Petain, General Gallieni and General Pershing have all been painted *from life, and all have autographed their portraits. The works are of small and -medium size, filled with figures, animals and men, executed with such minute detail as to be worthy of Meissonier. Their color is aalways good and the artist's power as a draughtsman is so unfailing as to command respect. "Captured Enemy Flags, Nov., 1914," "French Six Inch Gun, in a Snow .storm on its way to take position in the Bois de la Gruerie, Argonne, Jan. 25, 1915," "A Veteran Zouave of the Wars of 1870 and 1914," "The English Monitors that shelled 'Ostend," "The Aeroplane of the Most Famous of Aces, Guynemer, Cachy, Sept. 3, - 1916," "Cavalry Halting at Frise," "The First Anzacs in Bapaume after it had been *retaken, March 19, 1917," "Belgian Machine Gunners on Sandbag Breast-works, Ramscapelle, Nov. 21, 1916." -"French Squad in the Lane of Asola," "The House of Napoleon, Asola," "French convoy at Monte Tomba," "The Fort of Tavanne de fending Verdun," "American Flags pass -under the Arc de Triomphe," "The Staff of ;General Pershing," and "General Pershing passing down the Champs Elysees, ac claimed by Paris," are only a few -of these interesting historical records thlat should be studied with in terest and pleasure by every patriot. The proceeds of the admission charge (25 'cents), through the two weeks of the exhi bition, until Dec. 20, will be given to the American Navy Club for enlisted men of 'the U. S. Navy and Marine Corps. Twenty ~five per cent of the proceeds on sales w!ill ;also be devoted to the saine ta-use. Story of a Frick Titian One of MNvr. Frick's most important pic tures, Titian's, "Red Cap," reproduced on this page-is thought to be a portrait of Lorenzo dei Medici in his youth. The "Red Cap" was bought fronm Sir Hugh Lane of London, four years ago, and the draft for this picture and the Holbein, Sir Thomas Cromwell," for a sum ap proachlinig, $400,000, was on the ocean (on anotlher ship) at the time when Sir Hug-h Lane perished on the Lusitania, when re turniing to Englan-d after a few days' visit to N. Y. He did not, of course, receive the draft, but it was deposited in his bank and under his estate solvent, as his bankruptcy from over-buying of costly art works, was impending at the timie of his death. The "Red Cap" was hawked througl Bond Street, London, ten or twelve years ago, by an unknown man who carried the old blackened canvas under his arm, wrapped in a newspaper. He offered it for 50 pounds, but found no buyer. Some time later, it found its way into a London auc tion room. Sir Hugh Lane was present, recognized its beauty, although it was dark with dirty old varnish and bid it in for j 200 or flJ 300-took it home, cleaned it; and revealed the splendid picture. He called it a Titian, and his opinion was so valued that the experts got into a mighty battle over the attribution and the London papers .4t MAN WITH RED CAP Titian In Frick Collection See story this page were filled with a discussion as to whether the "find" was a Titian, a Giorgione, or only a "school picture." Finally all agreed that it was an early Titian and painted when under the direct influence of Giorgione, alnd that probably Giorgione had worked on the white of the front of the picture, as it was decidedly in his manner. Then Sir Hugh sold the can vas to the Grenfell for 3,000 pounds. Later Grenfell became insolvent and sold his col lection and Sir Hugh bought the Titian again. A few years later it was purchased by Mr. Frick at the same time as the Hol bein "Sir Thomas Cromwell." Many critics now give the picture to Giorgione entirely, which makes it far rarer and more valuable, as there are only few examples of this master's work existing. In the Altman collection there is a Giorgione "Head of a Man" for which Mr. Altman is said to have paid $400,000, but which in no way compares with the "Red Cap." Lillian Genth has returned to her Green wich Village studio from her summer spent in the West, wlhere she painted at Carmel, Cal., on the island of Santa Cruz and in New Mexico. She afterwards spent some time at her country place, Hermit Cliff, Conn. William Blake at Grolier Club The exhiibition of the works of William Blake now on at The Grolier Club, 47 E. 60 St., is the most important ever held in this country. Its range is so wide that the g,enieral public can gain from it a clear men cal portrait of Blake's extraordinary per soniality and follow the course of his art irom its earliest to its latest phase, an ex pe ience to be valued. Sydney Joseph at Kingore's The new Kingore Galleries, 668 Fifth Ave., have opened their season withi a col lection of drawinigs by Sydney Joseph, a man well drilled in his craft and whose work, with its flowing harmony of move ment and high linear quality, is well worthy of the honor. The artist is a Californian wlho began his studies in America and fol lowed them later in Europe. Most of the works are in pen and ink. In "Venus and Mars," with the intricate patterln of the wvoman's head-dress and gowIn, and the man's robe, there is the unfailing line that imiarks the true artist. "Scheherazade" is frankly Persian. "The Prophet " is a strong character work, and has tonal qualities. *'The Rendezvous," "La Princesse Loin taime," "The Slave," "Persian Legend," the "Fairy Woman" and "Gentleman in Wait ing," all have harmony and grace and beauty of design. Allan C. Eldredge at Babcock's Allan C. Eldredge, recently returned from France where he joined the Camouflage Corps on America's entry in the war, is showing a group of oils, pastels, and sketches at the Babcock Galleries, 19 E. 49 St., through Dec. 17. While the work be trays the youth of the painter in its un certainty, and lacks the force that can come only through years of study and hard work, it has, nevertheless, charm of color, enthusiasm and refinement in choice of subject. All the works present Nature in her quieter moods. The artist was in the i\rgonne fight and at uhateau-Thierry. "Dawn," painted from an aeroplane, is high keyed. "Off Block Island," a marine, has depth and volume. "Woodland Pool, Moon light," is poetic. "Morning" is well lit, and "Autumn in Alsace" rings sincere. "Place of Silence," "Angry Sea" and "Pool of the Lilies" are. appealing works. Zelma Baylos has returned to her Sher wood studio from Lake Mahopac, where she painted several decorative flower subjects and portraits. One of the most successful of the latter is a presentment of Susan Hal fren, the actress. Emile Gruppe who spent the summer at XWToodstock has returned recently to N. Y. Pissarro At Durand-Ruel's The majority of the paintinigs by Pissarro, on view at the Durand-Ruel Galleries, 12 E. 57 St., through Dec. 20, have been recently inported from France. Beautiful works of high quality, they form one of the most rennied exhibitic.is that New York has seen in maniy a cuay. In these poetical anid altogether able coniceptioins, there is an un mistakable living force, the result of keen love of anid sympatlhy with nature, that proclaims the artist one of the World's leaders in landscape painting. His trees sway l)eneath rolling clouds, his verdure, fresh anid green, palpitates with life, and hlis figures, wvlen they are introduced into a compositioni, move in life-like manner, in tenit upon the tasks upon which they are engaged. 'Sur les c6teaux, pres les Mathurins, Pontoise," so ably drawn, so lightly touched with the hand of a master, impresses its rare quality on the lover of good art. "Passage, plein soleil," with the glory of sunlight that floods the tender greens, is an appealing design, "Cour de ferms," lhas life and movement and is a rich color coniception, "Dechargement de bois, Rouen," in which there appears no thought of technique, but plainly a thorough enjoy ment of Nature, a feeling for color, light, air and movement, is a commonplace sub ject into which with his gift for picturesque arrangement, the artist has presented a truly poetical work. "Gardeuse de Vache," is another fine portrayal of soft gradations of light and tone, and "Poiriers on Fleurs," "Blanchisseus, -Becheuse" and "Laveuse," are some of the other remarkable examples., Nat'I Society of Craftsmen The National Society of Craftsmen in collaboration with The Art Alliance of America, 10 E. 47 St., have arranged their thirteenth annual exhibition and sale, in the Art Alliance Galleries, to continue until Dec. 27. The following crafts are more or less elaborately represented: Decorative tex tiles, embroideries, tapestries, carved wood, jewelry, leather work, illumination, wrought iron and steel, chairs, pottery and glass, basketry, hand weaving, tiles, rugs, toys, copper and brass, small sculptures and book bindings. Mary Tannahill contributes a blouse of batik work that effectively combines brown with orange and gold. An embroidered smock in solid color, with touches of em broidery, comes from Bloomingdale Hospi tal at White Plains. Irene Weir contributes some decorative tiles. A tea set, in con color, comes from the Greewich House. The exhibition contains a particularly choice collection of wrought iron, executed by Samuel Yellin. The hinges and other door appurtenances are intensely decora tive and certain of the boxes and screens are exquisitely fashioned. Another note worthy bit of metal work consists of a sconce, done in hand wrought copper, touched with silver. A case containing Czecho-Slovak embroidery merits more than a passing notice. Among the hand bags in the same case are examples of women's wear finished in worsted em broidery. Charlotte B. Wille, is represented by two sewed baskets and a miniature tray. The shapes are particularly pleasing. Some finely wrought silver by A. H. Anderson, comes from the Elverhoj Colonony, at Milton-on-Hudson. A fire opal ring, and a shell cameo pin, with a gold and silver frame, sprinkled with gem stones, attract attention for their workmanship. The art t,ook-bindings are by Harvey S. Chatfield, Fanny Dudley, Eleanor Van Sweringen, Elizabeth Mosenthal, Flora Hall, and Florence Dowden. Certain of the two finished covers, carrying designs introduc ing parallels in gold tooling, are excellent i :l the executive. The toiys shown are de serving of high praise as pointing the way of escape from German thraldom in this field. War Pictures Exhibit What is probably the largest single col lection in the world of photographs of the War, taken at the front and behind the lines in France and Germany, is on exhibition at th e N. Y. Public Library, 42 St., for two months. These photographs form one of the most complete and artistic collections Df pictures of the war ever exhibited, and gives a complete pictorial story of the war. The photographs were taken by the offi :ial photographers of the Signal Corps at :ached to the American Exp?editionary F'orces in Europe, and give a vivid repre ;entation of the conditions under which our :roops operated. The exhibitionl will be open to the public rom 9 a. m. to 6 p. m. and on Sundays *rom 1 to 5 p. m. Cullen Yates who spent the summer )ainting at his home at Shawnee, Pa., has iow returned to his Van Dyck studio, where le is at work on some commissions. Z5 -%.,-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~LE L ALi-L -. L,- d Vy -% - P.& D. COLNACHI &OBACH (ESTABLISHED 1760), Publisher by Appointment to King George Dealers In Paintings, Drawings, Engravings and Etchings by Old and Modern Masters. Experts, Valuers and Publishers. 144-145-146, NEW BOND ST., LONDON, W. Cabk Address, COLNAGHI, LONDON. Galleries [SCHWARTZPAINTINGSI 18East 46th Street ECIG OP. Ritz-Carlton NEW YORK ENGRAVINGS] ARLINGTON GALLERIES 274 Madison Avenue, bet. 39th & 40th Streets MODERN PAINTINGS Exhibition by American Arti'ts Every Fortnight During the Season Phone, Wabash 6115 GERDA AHLM X RESTORER OF PAINTINGS from the Royal Old Pinakothek at Munich Doei Every Kind of Restoring Work on Paintings ALSO CLEANING OF COLLECTIONS 1706 Auditorium Tower Chicago ART AND BOOK SALES Thatcher M. Adams Sale The late Thatcher M. Adams of N. Y., who died last summer, left a collection of early English portraits, which are to be sold by *the American Art Association at the Plaza Hotel in January. Among the best known paintings in the Adams collection, most of which he ac quired through the late T. J. Blakeslee, are the -following: "Portrait of Capt. Thomas Cornewall, by Thomas Gainsbor ough, from the Delbury Hall, near Lud low, Salop, sold by the family at Christies, London, in 1905; "Portrait of Master Ar buthnot," by Sir Thomas Lawrence, from the collection of White We'bbs, Engfield, near London; "Portrait of Lady Brough ton," by~ Sir Henry Raeburn; "A Boy with Cherries," by Sir Henry Raeburn, formerly owned by the artist's family and later in the collection of Sir William Cunliffe; por trait of Master Hare, as "Infancy," by Sir Joshua Reynolds, for some time owned by Thomas Hoode Woods, for forty years a partner of Christie, Manson & Woods, and sold at his sale in 1906. There are also a "Portrait of the Misses Paine," by Sir Joshua Reynolds, sold at Chlristie's 1830, and eventually owned by Thomas Agnew & Sons, from which firm it was obtained by Mr. Adams; "Portrait of Mrs. St. George and Child," by George Romney, from Headford Castle, where it hung until about 1888, when it came to Mrs. Winn. a granddaughter of Mrs. St. George, and was exhibited at Grafton Gal leries "Fair Children" in 1875; "Portrait of Sir Archibald Campbell," of Inverneil, bought from a member of the Campbell family; "Portrait of William Robert, Sec ond Duke of Leinster," 'by Reynolds, from the collection of Gen. Bulwere of Hevden Hall. and "Portrait of Francis, Tenth Earl of Huntington," by Joshua Reynolds, en graved by T. B. Parkes, 1874, formerly in the collection of the Marquis of Hastings at Donington Castle. Several Dutch masters are also repre sented in the collection, among them Nicholas Maes with his portrait of "A Cavalier," painted about 1680, being for merly in the collection of the first Marauis of Dufferin. and in the Hudson-Fulton Ex hlibition. Metropolitan Museum, 1909; a "Portrait of a Girl," by Albert Cuyp, from the collectionl of Sir Charles Robinson and *FRENCH &-COMPANY Works of Art 6 EAST 56th STREET, NEW YORK ANTIQUE TAPESTRIES VELVETS EMBROIDERIES FURNITURE "Portrait of a Burgomeister," by Miere velt. I In addition to the collection of Mr. Adams' there will be sold at the same time ex amples by the Barbizon painters and their contemporaries, and important works by Monet, Renoir and Americans, from the estate of the late Henry Sayles of Boston; important canvases by Manet, Deg-as, Monet, Sisly and Pizzarro, collected by Joseph F. Flanagan of Boston; represen-' tative modern works assembled by the late Harris B. Dick of New York, and paintings from various owners from the Albert Spencer, Mary J. Morgan and George I. Seney sales. Pares Art-0tLXjects Sale The extensive stock to which was added the private collection of Mr. Emil Pares,, antiquarian of Paris and N. Y., was sold at the American Art Galleries throughout- this week. At the first session Monday afternoon, a total of $11,353.50 was realized. The highest price, $290, was paid by Leone Ricci, for No. 167, Hispano-Moresque, XVI century, lustred faience deep dish, 1934 in. diam. Other important items sold were: No. 97, French Directioire lacquer garniture; jardi niere, 11 in. H., 14 in. L.; vases, 16 in. H., 9 in. W. Leone Ricci, $270. No. 85, French Louis XVI oval engraved gold patch' box, 1 in. H., -2?2 in. L., l7/8 in. W. H. Harding, $240. At the second session, Tuesday afternoon, a total of $28,030 was realized. The feature, No. 297, Flemish XV century sculptured gilded and polychrome wood group, "Flight into Egypt," 4 ft. 2 in. H., 3 ft. 1 in. VW., from the Catedrale de Calahora, Spain, was purchased by Mr. W. R. Hearst for $2,100. Other important items sold were: No. 339. Spanish XV Century sculptured poly chrome Gothic marble effigy, "Roi des Isles Baleares," 6 ft. 2 in. L., 2 ft., 3 -in. W., from Eglisia de Sicles, Navarra, Spain. Mr. W. R. Hearst, $2,050. No. 333, Italian XV Century Della Robbia poly chrome faience bas-relief,, "The - Adoration of, the Virgin," 25?2 in. H., 19 in. W., from the' Collection Gavet, Paris. Mrs. P . Van Veen, $2,000. No. 342. French XVI Century Renaissance sculp tured Hauteville mantelpiece. 6 ft. 7 in. H., 6 ft. w., from the Collection de Gorecourt, France. T. Brunner, $1,400. No. 334, Italian XV- Century polychrome stucco bas-relief in gilded frame, "The Adoration," by Della Robbia. 3 ft. 2 in. H., 8 ft. W., from th Col lection Gavet. Paris. Mrs. P. Van Veen, $1,200. At the third session, Wednesday after noon, a total of $23,175 was realized. The highest price of the session, $2,500, was paid by J. S. Noorian for No. 664, Flemish VIII Century verdure tapestry panel, 9 ft. H., 7 ft. 3 in. W. Other important items sold were: No. 663, two French XVIII Century Aubussor, verdure tapestry panels, 7 ft. 3? in., 3 ft. 2 in. W. J. Kane, $1,500. No. 665, Flemislh XVIII Century verdure tapestry panel, 8 ft. 7 in., 5 ft. 4 in. Leone Ricci, $1,000. No. 598, twelve French XVIII Centurv curtains. Leone Ricci, $470. At the fourth session, Wednesdav eve ning, a total of $13,005 was realized for the sale of pictures, making the grand total to date $80,526. No. 710,, "The Virgin and Child," by Adrian Isenbrandt, 14 in. by 93,4 in., from the Convento de Carmelites, Spain, was purchased bv P. Van Veen for $5,100, the leading price for the pictures. Other important items sold were: No. 711, "St. Veronica'a Veil," by El Creco, 19?/ in. x 25? in. Heniat. $1,350. No. 712, "Marriage of St-. Catherine," Italian XIV Century, from the Count de Chaves Collection, Spain. P. Van Veenl, $850: No. 709, "Portrait of a Youth," Flemish XVI Century, 1 1?/ in. x 8 M in. F. S. ERothachild, $550. No. 714, "Cupida at Sport," (two), French XVIII, 44 in. x 32 in., bought from the ancient "Atelier of Boucher." Mrs. Frederick Vanderbilt, $500. The entire collection of paintings by the veteran artist, Charles Hetherington, -which has been on exchibition for the last two weeks at the Schultheis Galleries, 425 Fifth Ave., has breen purchased by a Museulm. -Rich Library Sale Books from the library of Mr. William L. Rich of N. Y., and other estates sold at the Anderson Galleries on Monday and Tues day afternoon last, brought a grand total of $5,859.95. The top price, $750, was paid by Harry Stone for No. 519, Works of Shakespeare, (London,' 1853) 16 vols., extra-illustrated, one of 150 copies printed. Uther important items sold were: No.- 553, "Lives of the Queenis of England from the Norman Conquest," by Agnes Strickland (Phiia., n. d.). royal edition,- one of 39 copies printed. G. Wells, $205. No. 96. Beaux Arts Classics (Paris. n. d.), 10 vols., Edition- de Deux-Mondes, limited to 20 copies, of which only .9 were printed for America. H. Popper, $170. No. 579, The Writings of Henry David Thoreau (Boston, 1906), 20, vols., MS. edition, one of 600 copies. G. D. Smith, $150. CLEVELAND The Cleveland Museum is about to close a six weeks' exhibition of the well known camouflage paintings and drawings of na ture by Abbott H. Thayer and Gerald Thayer. The memorial exhibition of paintings by the late Henry Golden Dearth is attracting number of visitors and will be followed, Dec. 21, by a loan exhibition of rare old rugs, to include one or two fine specimens of the Armenian rugs of which only twelve are known to exist. A recent gift to the museum from Mr. J. H. Wade is a piece of church embroidery including ofrey bands of the precious "opus Ahglicanum." A- series of lectures on Italian Art, by Frank Jewett Mather, Jr., of Princeton, is to be a feature of a full museum -program this season. Jessie C. Glasier. DES MOINES (Iowa) Oils by Gardner Symons and Ben Foster are on exhibition through the month at the City Library Gallery. "Moon and Evening Light," by Symons and "An Autumn Mood," by Foster, are the two pictures attracting the most atten tion. Symons' "Southern Calif." also re ceived plaudits. News of the Dealers Private sales of importance are reported daily, and there is a lively competition among the dealers for the best antiques and the most valuable tapestries and art works. M. Jacques Seligmann has been foremost in the purchase of some unusual old furnii ture and has carried away several prizes from the London salesrooms, as many English owners seem to be parting, not only with their old pictures, but with their old furniture as well. Other Paris dealers also report some exceptionally interesting. purchases and sales, which for obvious rea sons cannot be detailed in this letter. One firm of' picture dealers on the Place Ven dome recently went out of their line and disposed of a beautiful old set of early French furniture for half a million francs. The same firm also made some remarkable sales of important pictures to a new Ameri can collector from the West. Mr. Isaac Simmons, of the Lewis and Sim nions Galleries, returned last month on the Mauretania from a protracted trip to Lon don and Paris. Mr. Louis Ralston, of the Ralston Gal leries, 567 Fifth Ave., recently returned from several weeks' stay in London and Paris, where he secured a number of fine examples of the best European art, now shown at his galleries. Mr. Arth-ur FRolsom, of the Folsom Gal leries, recently returned to N. Y. from Clevelanld and Newport. Mr. John Levy, who returned last month from a most successful business trip to London and Paris, is soon to open his new Galleries at Fifth Ave. and 46 St. DUVEEN BROTHERS PARIS-NEW YORK TAPESTRIES PORCELAINS OBJETS d'ART "Vernay Old English Furniture- Old English Pottery- Old ing Ilish Glass- Old English Sil - ver-Old English Pewter. Original Examples. New York. 10, 12, 14 E. 45th Str..t E London, W. 217 Piccadilly Bourgeois Galleries Old and Modern Masters 668 Fifth Avenue New York i Tolentino Art Gallery Fine Antique Furniture Bronzes and Marbles. Interior Decorator Rome - New York Via Sistina 57 - 749 Fifth Avenue The Corner Art Shop I 137 East 57th Street New York City N. W. Cor. of Lexington Ave. OBJETS d'ART Paintings, Engravings, Etchings, Glass Pewter, Sheffield Plate, Silver, Antiques and Curios Proprietors EMIL F. BEGIEBING JOHN SHOPE |Salmagundi Club Winter Show The December exhibition at the Sal-! magundi Club, 47 Fifth Ave., consists of 129 of watercolors, pastels, illustrations and etcins. heShaw Prize was awarded to! legt Loi rnberg, frhis "Repose," a full Prizeno nude, seated on a divan. The Isidor, Piefor watercolors, went to J. Scott Williams, for his "In Sherman Glen." Thei Shaw Prize for etchings was given to Kerr Eby, for his "Railroad Bridge."t -Arthur I. Keller's,- "In the Jewish Quar-| ter," is a sympathetic bit of the Ghetto. "The Borghese Gardens, Rome," by Chas.~ Warren Eaton, is a strong study of the 4 storied scene with its famous trees, in re-; flected light. Geo. Lawrence Nelson, sends two portraits of which, "Helen," is easily the best. "Rogers Boat Yard, Noank," by j Frederick K. Detwiller, is a good portrayal. "Patient," by W. R. Leigh, in the lighter medium, shows a~ couple of burrous againstz the Mlexican adobe houses and walls, thei "Hill Crest Farm," by Birge- Harrison, is a.. fine snow scene and Roy Brown's, "UnderY the B ridge," in high key, is an excellent > example. Matilda- Browne is at her studio at 142 E. 18 St., after a successful season at Cran berry Lake anld Far Hills, N. J., Colebrook,; Conn., and Oyster Bay, L. I. After her* house and studio at Lyme, Conn., were fin ished, she spent the end of the season there, received the prize for the best pi& ture at the Conlnecticut Academy and sold her N. Y. Academy pict'ure. The Gov't.| asked her to donate her "Return of the Belgian Refugees" to the permanent ex hibition at Washington, which she did, and sold her "August Morning" to the Bruce< Museum at Greenwich, Conn. AM ERI CAN A RT NEW S9 PAINTINGS BY = American Artists WILLIAM MACBETH I Incorporated 450 Fifth Avenue - 40th Street - New York City THURBER ART GALLERIES American and Foreign Paintings 75 EAST WASHINGTON STREET CHICAGO, ILL. ANDERSON ART GALLERIES 426 S. Michigan Ave. CHICAGO |Amerc'icn PAINTINGS LONDON PARIS FLORENCE ROME 'Hudson Forwarding & Shipping Co. Custom House Brokers and Forwarding Agents 24 STATE STREET NEW YORK, U. S. A. TELEPHONE BOWLING GREEN 5696-5697-5698 We specialize in clearing through Customs ANTIQUES, WORKS OF ART, PAINTINGS, Etc. WE HAVE EXCELLENT FACILITIES FOR HANDLING SHIPMENTS TO OR FROM ALL PARTS OF THE WORLD ~~~~ .~i The Pennsylvania A,4cademy of the Fine Arts THE OLDEST ART SCHOOL IN AMERICA Winter Term October 6, 1919, to May 29, 1920 Instruction in Drawing, Painting, Illustration - ~~~and Sculpture. Faculty: Charles Grafly, Hugh H. BreckenridSe, -Henry McCarter, Joseph T. Pearson, Jr., DanielI ;Garber, Fhilip L. Hale, Robert Vonnoh, Arthur B.I Carles, John F. Harbeson, Charles de Gear. Seven teen Cresson Scholarships awarded this year for travel in Europe and America. -ELEANOR B. BARKER, Culrator Broad and Cherry Streets PHILADELPHIA Amelia Rose, the well-known artists' mrodel who has posed for all of the famous| American artists and many of their most important mural decorations and sculptures, has in addition to her posingC, taken over the "Black Parrot" tea room at 131 Wash ington Place, where she is specializing Fri 'day evenings as Artists' Nights. At present .she is giving an exhibition of sketches and paintings for which she has posed. The .artists represented are: F. S. Church, Luis Mora, Hugo Fisher, Harrison Fisher, C. Bosseron Chambers, Howard C. Christy, Henry Mosler, Walter Russell, Penryn :Stanlaws, Roif Armstrong, George B. Tor :rey and others. HIENRY REINHARDT & SON Old and Modern PAINTINGS Mew York Chicago Paris 565 Fifth Avenue 536 S. Michigan Avenue 12 Place Vendome NOTICE TO GALLERIES Changes in the copy of advertisements and calendar must reach the office not later than Wednesday of each week. SPECIAL EXHIBITIONS CALENDAR New Haven Paint and Clay Club, New Haven, Conn.; Second Exhibition of Little Pictures at the Free Public Library -Jan. 10-24. Exhibits Received-Jan. 3 at Library. Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, Phila., 115th Annual Exhibition-Feb. 8 Mar. 28, 1920. Entries Jan. 19, 1920. CALENDAR OF SPECIAL NEW YORK EXHIBITIONS Ackerman & Son, 10 E. 46 St.-Watercolor drawings of American Aeroplanes at work in France by Bertram Sandy. Old English Sporting Paintings and Prints, to Dec. 20. p Ainslie, George H., 615 Fifth Ave.-Inness paintings, permanent exhibition. | Anderson Galleries, 59 St. and Park Ave.-Paintings of the American and Allied Armies by J. F. Boucher, to Dec. 20. Arden Gallery, 599 Fifth Ave.-Twenty-first annual exhibition of the American Society of Miniature Painters, to Dec. 31. Arlington Galleries, 274 Madison Ave.-National Association of Women Painters and Sculptors. Dec. 16-Jan. 3. Art Alliance of America, 10 E. 47 St.-Seventeenth annual exhibition of the Natural Society of Crafts men, to Dec. 27. Art Salon, Hotel Majestic, Central Park W.-Water colors of Italy and Holland by Carlton C. Fowler, to Dec. 20. Babcock Gallery. 19 E. 49 St.-Oils and pastels by Allan C. Eldredge, to Dec. 27. Bonaventure, E. F., 601 Fifth Ave.-Exhibition of Objects of Art and Vertu of the XVIII Century, to Dec. 15. Bourgeois Gallery, 668 Fifth Ave.-Graphic Art by Edward Munch of Christiania, Norway, to Dec. 15. Brooklyn Museum, Eastern Parkway, Brooklyn Fourth annual exhibition of the Brooklyn Society of Etchers, to Dec. 31. Buccini Studios, 347 Fifth Ave.-Hand-painted Art Screens by Alberto Buccini, to Dec. 20. Catherine Lorillard Wolfe Art Club, Grace House, 802 Broadway-Designs and Crafts, to Dec. 22. Cluny, 1 E. 47 St.-Exposition of Eighteenth cen tury objects, to Dec. 24. Daniel Gallery, 2 W. 47 St.-Watercolors by De muth, Marin, Morton, Zorach and Zarrow, to Dec. 31. Durand-Ruel Galleries, 12 E. 57 St.-Recently im ported works by Pissarro, to Dec. 20. Duveen Bros., 720 Fifth Ave.-Old Chinese Porce lains. EArich Gallery, 707 Fifth Ave.-Children's Portraits of the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries, to Dec. 20. Grolier Club, 47 E. 60 St.-The Works of William Blake. to Jan. 10. 9 Hotel Majestic, Art Salon, Central Park W. and 72 St. (under the direction of Dr. Fred Hovey Allen) -Water colors of Italy and Holland by Carlton C. Fowler, to Dec. 20. Kennedy & Co.. 613 Fifth Ave.-Original etchings and drypoints by Frank W. Benson, through Dec. Kingore Gallery, 668 Fifth Ave.-Drawings by Syd ney Joseph, to Dec. 24. Macbeth Gallery, 450 Fifth Ave.-Paintings by William Baxter Closson, to Dec. 20. Loan exhibi tion of paintings by Emil Carlsen. Madison Gallery, 106 W. 57 St.-Exhibition by Contemporary Painters. Metropolitan Museum, Central Park at E. 82 St. Open daily from 10 A. M. to 5 P. M., Saturday until 10 P. M., Sunday 1 P. M. to 5 P. M. cte mission Monday' and Friday, 25c-free other days. Special exhibition of prints of Holbein's "Dance of Death." Exhibition of Modern French Art lent by the Government of the French Republic, Dec. 16 Feb. 1. Portrait of BARBARA DtCHESS OF CLEVELAND by LELY. 50 X 40 Fine Examples of the Early Italian, Dutch XVII Century and English XVIII Century Schoo'. ARTHUR RUCK, Galleries: 4, BERKELEY ST., PICCADILLY, LOONDrN, W.I. ESTABLISHED 1900 - hteEhrich OaUteries Dealers in _aintingp bp " "b OIaoterz" 5 707 FIFTH AVE, at 55th St., NEW YORIE - IMPORTANT works of the Old Masters" are to be found in our galleries at all 5 times. Notable and rare ex amples are constantly being acquired by us. Paintings purchased from us are always exchangeable at the full purchase price. Bonaventure Galleries 01 FIFTH AVE. NEW YORK near 48th Street Complete Set of the Presidents WITH THEIR PORTRAITS in Handsome Morocco Binding Milch Galleries, 108 W. 57 St-Selected paintings of limited size, to Dec. 25. Lower Galleries Selected paintings of limited size, annual holiday exhibition, to Dec. 25. Montross Gallery, 500 Fifth Ave.-Pictures by Ameri can artists, through Dec. Montclair Art Museum, Montclair, N. J.-Exhibib tion of Arts and Crafts, and Batiks, to Dec. 28. Museum of French Art, 599 5th Ave.-Special loan exhibition of French art, satire and fancy, to Dec. 21. National Academy of Design, 215 W. 57 St.-Winter Exhibition. Dec. 13-Jan. 11. N. Y. Public Library, Fifth Ave. and 42 St.-Illus trated books of the past four centuries, to Dec. 31. War Photographs taken at the Front Reinhardt Gallery, 565 Fifth Ave.-Special exhibi tion of modern American landscapes. to Dec. 21. Salmagundi Club, 47 Fifth Ave.-Watercolors, pas tels, illustrations and etchings by members, to Dec. 20. Scandinavian Art Shop, 728 Madison Ave.-Swedish. Danish and Norwegian embroidery. Schultheis & Co., 425 Fifth Ave.-Paintings by a group of American artists. Schwartz Galleries, 14 E. 46 St.-Paintings, etch ings and engravings. Stuyvesant Club, St.. Mark's Church, 129 E. 10 St. Oil paintings of Spain by William Sanger, to Dec. 31. Vernay, Arthur S., 10 E. 45 St.-Exhibition oi Samplers. Weyhe - Gallery, 708 Lexington Ave.-Lithographs by-1Odillon Redon.. 556 Fifth Ave.-Etchings and dry points by Muir head Bone, through Dec. Whitney Studio Club, 147 W. 4 St.-Flower paint ings by Nan Watson; drawings by .Mahonri-Young; watercolors and wood carvings by Herm M. l-ind ing. to Dec. 24, incl. Howard Young Gallery, 620 Fifth Ave.-Oils and pastels by Louis Kronberg, to Jan. 1. ART AND LITERARY AUCTION SALE CALENDIAR American Art Association. 6 E. 23 St.-Etchings by Axel Herman Haig, the collection of Richard H. Hood, sale Dec. 16, eve. Anderson Galleries. 489 Park Ave.-Miscellantous books from the library of W. Pierson Delano of York, Tues. and Wed., Dec. 16-17, afts. English, Spanish, Italian and French furniture, fans, silver and miscellaneous art objects, the property of Mrs. Henry L. Burnett and E. S. Ulmann of N. Y., etc., to be sold Dec. 15, 19 and 20, afts. Samuel T. Freeman & Co.. Phila., Pa.-The collection of the late Emily Leland Harrison, Dec. 15. 16, 17, 18, 19, afts. Exhibition Dec. 11. to day of sale. C F. Libbie & Co., Boston. Mass.-Miscellaneous books from several private libraries, Dec. 16-17, each day at 10 and 2 o'clock. ART WRITER LOST ? There was much concern in Paris in mid November, when the editor of the AMERICAN ART NEWS left that city for London, on his way ba6k,to N. Y., over the failure on the part of Mrs iWrg Le land Hunter, wife of the well kn~6r American authority and writer on1 tapesXries, and his many friends in Paris, to obtain any word of his whereabouts. Mr. Hunter left Paris for Vienna in early November, leaving MIrs. Hunter there on account of the bad travelling conditions, but no word came of his arrival at the Aus trian capital, nor could any information he obtained of his apparent disappearance. It is possible that 'ere this some news of his safety may have arrived in Paris, but none such had come at last advices. Mr. Durand-Ruel has returned from France after several weeks absence from his galleries, E. 57 St. He secured a num ber of fine paintings which will be shown during the winter. 10 A - E - - C -A- - A - -ANEWT NEW S LEWIS AND SIMMONS Rare Objects ot Art and Old Masters 605 Fifth Avenue NEW YORK LONDON 180 New Bond Street PARIS--16 Rue de la Paix THE - RA ST ON GALLERJES O- THlEEARLY eNGUSII r*tOiginalE(c6fings Co?r? c9,or/nqAin/i 74 FIF1TH AVE3NUJE-NEtW YORK AT 46th. STREET C. & E. CANIlSSA lflftque Works of lin Paris: 93 Champ Elysees ^>, ~~Naples: Pizz d Mari * *3 New Yorlc: IWstS50thbSt. ART FIRM IN NIEW HOME (Established 1884) (ttIau%tn Srt 3aoomb, 3Iut. PAINTINGS, ETCHINGS, ART ENGRAVINGS, ART MIRRORS, UNIQUE LAMPS, DECORATION>S . 746 Mae ison Avenue (8e . 64' h and 65th S a.) SELIGMANN Worj$ of Akrt 23 Place Vendome, Paris Arnold Seligmann, Rey & Co. Incorporated 7 W. 36th St. New York R.C & N. M. VOSE ESTABLISHED IN 1841 HICH CLASS PAINTINGS EARLY ENGLISH BARBIZON AMERICAN * MODERN DUTCH BOSTON 398 BOYLS.TON 8THE:ElT * 1855-1919 O'BRIEN ART GALLERIES PAINTINGS by American and Foreign Artists 334 South Michigan Blvd. ( HICAGO Geo. Inness A. H. Wyant R. A. Blakelock ana_other prominent artists R. DUDENSING & SON 5 West Forty-fouithbSt., Bet. Fifth and Sixth Avenues N. E. MONTROSS Works of&Art MONTROSS GALLERY 550 FIFTH AVE. NEW YORK ACKE RMANN Sporting Paintings Rare Prints New York - - 10 East 46th Street Chicago 620 South Michigan Avenue Exclusive Scereens Paintings Establislked 1886 Buccini Studios 347 FIFTH AVE., NEW YORKi Murals Interior Decoration JIOHN LEVY]I HIGH CLASS PAINTINGS | 14 EAST 46th STREET OPPOSITE THE RITZ-CARLTO N l Scott & Fowles ART GALLERIES 590 Fifth Avenue Between 47th and 48th Streets NEW YORK THE| Folsom Galleries 560 Fifth Avenue (Dreicer Building) NEW YORK AMERICAN PAINTINGS DREYFOUS 582 FIFTH AVE. NEW YORK Antique and Modern WORKS OF ART Furniture. Enamels. China, PARIS Fine Leather Goods, Etc. LONDON E. C. BABCOCK Successor to Snedecor & Co. Established by John Snedecor in 1852 Fine Quality Paintings 19 EAST 49th STREET NEW YORIC FRANK PARTRIDGE Old English Furniture Antique Chinese Porcelains 6 WORKS OF 'ART 6 WEST 56TH STREET NEW YORX 26 King St., St. James', London KHENRY SCHULTHEIS CO. and Foreign PAINTN GiSj Uptown Galleriexs 425 Fifth Avenue at 38th Street Telephone VanderbUlt 2287 Downtown GAllerie. and Framing Dept. 142 Fulton Street Telephone Cortlandt 2477-2478 F. Kleinberger Galleries, IDC s 725 Fifth Avenue E ~New York g ~~Parisi Ancient Paintings |l Specialty Primitives g ~~Old Dutch Masters JACQUES SELIGMANN & FILS 57 Rue St. Dominique (Ancien Palais Sagan) PARIS Jacques Seligmann & Co 705 Fifth Avenue NEW YORK _,,,.,,,,,,,IIIIl l l l l l l l l l l l , Young's Art Galleries -- Amrrirau kltiitfii - Art Notes and notices of current _ exhibitions mailed on request 66 East Jackson Boulevard CHICAGO Satinover Galleries IMPORTERS OF. Selected Old, Masters 27 West 56th Street New York Arthur Tooth & Sons Established 1842 High Class Paintings London: 155 New Bond Street New York: 709 Fifth Avenue [ 0ollanb OaUderiet (Established 1858) American and Foreign Paintings 500 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK [ ~~~N. W. C.t. 42nd St. I KELEKIAN Objets de Collection 709 FIFTH AVENUE - -- NEW YORKC 2 PLACE YENDOME - - - PARIS 38 KASR-EL-NIL - - - - CAIRO London .Kyoto Osaka Boston Peking Shanghai YA-MANAKA & CO. 680 Fifth Avenue NEW YORK WORKSS or ART - ~FROM JAPAN AND C H INA In writing to advertisers please mention the AMERICAN ART NEWS