C h a p t e r 4 Posthumanism and the Prob lem of Social Justice: Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century In this chapter I would like to explore the present- day status and stakes of the epistemic overhaul that I have been tracing through the antislavery ma- terialisms of Frederick Douglass, Henry David Thoreau, and Walt Whit- man. The preceding chapters have suggested that t hese authors’ embodied accounts of the h uman bear certain affinities with the materialist turn of con temporary posthumanist theory. There is, of course, a kind of knowl- edge and also a kind of plea sure to be had in recognizing the slant rhymes of historical recurrence. However, this chapter starts from the premise that antebellum antislavery materialism should be in ter est ing to us now not simply b ecause of its shadowy prescience of posthumanist theory, but also because its divergence from con temporary theory can help to light up absences and aporias in posthumanist discourse t oday. The absence that antebellum antislavery materialism makes con spic u- ous is the missing term of race in con temporary posthumanist theory. As I have argued, the proto- posthumanism that Douglass, Thoreau, and Whitman developed in the 1850s was triggered by the rise of racial sci- ence and the consolidation of modern biological racism. Race is the found- ing proposition around which their antislavery materialisms gather, like 135 136 Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century so many antibodies, to wrest human materiality away from its conscrip- tion by racist ideology. Against the backdrop of this history, the margin- ality of race in con temporary posthumanist discourse is puzzling. In this regard, examining the transhistorical echoes between antislavery and con temporary posthumanist materialism can help to bring the latter’s un- dertheorized relationship to histories of racism and social justice into sharper focus. In d oing so, I hope to amplify demands that posthuman- ism’s current critics are already making for a fuller accounting of posthu- manism’s racial politics. Indeed, a growing number of critics now suggest that the absence of race from posthumanist theorizing constitutes a considerable theoretical and ethical failure. This absence registers most notably in what Zakiyyah Jackson describes as posthumanism’s “resounding silence” on the subject of racism, which remains one of the most power ful and resilient technologies for delimiting and policing the border between the “fully” h uman and the “nonhuman.”1 Race’s absence furthermore registers in the posthumanist ar- chive’s general neglect of theorists of color whose analyses of “the tight bonds between humanity and racializing assemblages in the modern era” prefigure posthumanism’s critique of Western humanism’s abjection of the nonhuman. As Alexander Weheliye points out, black feminists like Sylvia Wynter and Hortense Spillers began calling for revisionary “genres” or con- ceptions of the h uman long before con temporary posthumanism picked up this refrain.2 To be fair, most critics working u nder posthumanism’s large tent un- derstand themselves to be advancing a critique of humanism’s exclusions that is sympathetic to antiracism while seeking to go beyond the anthropo- centric terms it offers. For these critics, posthumanism is a liberatory proj ect that proposes to radically extend the demo cratizing efforts that anti- racism and antisexism pioneered. Thus when Bruno Latour proposes that the exclusion of nonhuman being from moral and po liti cal consideration “ will soon appear . . . as extravagant as when the Founding F athers denied slaves and women the vote,” he identifies posthumanism as the successor to antiracism: a related but ultimately distinct po liti cal strug gle.3 Whereas antiracist and antisexist movements speak up for the equality of what they construe as dehumanized humans, posthumanism’s “flat ontology” makes the case for the ethical and po liti cal standing of nonhuman being, human or other wise. At its broadest, this chapter proposes that this distinction between de- humanized and nonhuman beings— a distinction that insists that “ human” is not just a biological but a natu ral moral identity— lies at the root of racism’s Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century 137 marginality in posthumanist discourse, as well as the marginality of specie- sism in antiracist discourse. Although theorists from both of these schools insist that “the h uman” is an ideological construct— a moral category whose borders have been willfully drawn and redrawn throughout Western hu- manism’s history— both schools nevertheless regularly naturalize the h uman by conflating this moral category with the biological category Homo sapiens. Thus, for instance, when posthumanists denounce human exceptionalism and defend nonhuman rights, they generally understand themselves to be speaking up for non– Homo sapiens. But in conflating the h uman with Homo sapiens, their critics observe, posthumanists ignore the long and ongoing history of racism that has systematically demoted targeted populations of Homo sapiens to the status of “nonhuman.” Meanwhile, if posthumanism fails to acknowledge that “the nonhuman” may include some Homo sapiens, for their part antiracist theorists also tend to argue that this inclusion is a heinous category mistake. That is, when antiracist critics document the genocidal consequences suffered by those to whom Western humanism has denied human status, they tend to insist that this moral category is in truth natu ral: that all Homo sapiens are human and ought, therefore, to be ac- corded equal human rights. Between posthumanism’s biologization of the moral category, “ human,” and antiracism’s moralization of the biological category, Homo sapiens, the artificiality of “the h uman”— something both discourses, in other moments, quite compellingly flag— recedes from view. To argue that the h uman is not synonymous with Homo sapiens is to ob- serve something so s imple, so very basic to posthumanist and antiracist theorizing, that it sometimes strikes me that I might be embarrassing my- self. Forging ahead nonetheless, this chapter aims to demonstrate that the slippage between the human and Homo sapiens (or, conversely, between the nonhuman and non– Homo sapiens) is per sis tent in posthumanist and social justice criticism and contributes to their mutual alienation. The first two sections below will therefore rehearse some of the most trenchant objec- tions and correctives to posthumanist theory offered by recent antiracist and social justice criticism. Although this discussion is bound to offer a critique of posthumanist theory, it is not meant to condemn the post- humanist proj ect tout court but, on the contrary, to strengthen it by sug- gesting how posthumanism might productively engage with antiracist and social justice theory going forward. As I shall suggest, a closer col- laboration between posthumanist and social justice theories can help to clarify the broad common ground that they in fact share. Toward this end, my third and final section w ill highlight posthumanism’s resonance with the work of the anticolonial and Black feminist theorist, 138 Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century Sylvia Wynter. I focus on Wynter’s work because, more than any other critic now writing on Blackness and justice, Wynter insists that overcom- ing racism is not simply a matter of redeeming liberal humanism but rather commits us to inventing new “genres of the h uman” that look beyond Western humanism’s episteme of “Man.” Wynter’s work, then, frames so- cial justice as an explic itly posthumanist proj ect— a proj ect of moving be- yond Western humanism— and as such it offers the most fertile site for discerning crosscurrents between posthumanist and social justice proj ects. This third section therefore lays out my vision for the partial reconcilia- tion and future collaboration between posthumanist materialisms and posthumanist social justice theories. One major advantage of this collabo- ration, I suggest, is that read through one another, these theories speak each other’s lapses, illuminating blind spots the other cannot see. Thus I show how each attempts to preserve a central feature of the episteme they ostensibly oppose: posthumanism remains committed to liberalism’s indi- vidualist politics while even Wynter’s social justice theory remains invested in Western humanism’s philosophy of human exceptionalism. Thus I pro- pose that, taken together, t hese theories spur each other to live up to the transformative potential of their epistemic challenge to liberal humanism’s construction of “Man.” At the same time, however, I shall argue that the clarified posthuman- ism this collaboration yields also makes the limitations of this proj ect more vis i ble— limitations that, I argue, antislavery materialism anticipates and therefore can help us to anatomize. Above I have suggested that the ante- bellum materialism I have been outlining lights up absences and aporias in its latter- day counterpart; if the absence is race, the aporia we arrive at here has to do with what I shall describe, in my Coda, as posthumanism’s romanticism. This chapter’s detour through twenty- first- century posthu- manisms thus ultimately leads us back to the antebellum sources with which it starts. In the Coda I w ill return to Douglass, Thoreau, and Whitman in order to suggest how their antislavery materialism helps us to confront the vestiges of romantic naturalism within modern posthumanism and presses us to reimagine what a f uture posthumanist politics might look like. Lastly, a note on methodology: these final chapters depart from the broadly historicist and textual approach of my foregoing chapters to en- gage in a more abstractly philosophical discussion of recent critical the- ory. They are nonetheless written with a number of dif fer ent potential readers in mind: from scholars of the nineteenth century who have little or no familiarity with con temporary critical theory, to critical theorists with l ittle or no interest in nineteenth- century lit er a ture. I have therefore Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century 139 tried to describe the theories treated in these final chapters in terms that rely as little as pos si ble upon the idioms or critical jargons characteristic of each. To some readers this decision may seem to express a degree of skepticism or estrangement from t hese critical schools, but my aim is clar- ity in the hopes that making these discourses accessible to new readers— and more mutually accessible to each other— will contribute to their further development. Myopias of the Anthropocene: Human ≠ Homo sapiens Posthumanist materialism confronts us with our inhumanity— our animal- ity, materiality, and irreducible alterity to ourselves. It pres ents this dehu- manizing portrait in a spirit of radical generosity: by acknowledging our constitution through, and dependence upon, nonhuman beings and systems, posthumanists suggest that we may fi nally renounce the specio- logical chauvinism (and perhaps even the suicidal tendencies) of our self- proclaimed autonomy from nature. Honoring that acknowl edgment would necessarily entail a profound rearrangement of current modes of ex- istence at all levels of its ordering. Daunting though this wholesale revolu- tion may be, the hope is that we might yet restructure global biopolitics and neoliberal biocapitalism, reor ga nize our consumptive and ethical be- hav iors, and reinvent our cultural and autobiographical narratives to make them, as N. Katherine Hayles puts it, “conducive to the long- range sur- vival of h umans and of other life- forms, biological and artificial, with whom we share the planet and ourselves.”4 For posthumanists, the continued flourishing of the human species depends upon embracing its nonhumanity, including the sensitive mechanisms of its organism and the fragile ecosystems of h uman and nonhuman existence on which h uman life depends. We must learn to think in terms of collective, planetary survival; indeed, given the porously networked nature of the human organism, there is, posthuman- ists suggest, no other kind. But if this effort to dehumanize the human is not intended to be degrading, it is nonetheless still necessary to theorize its relation to the dehumanizing assemblages of racism and sexism that precede it— a task that con temporary posthumanism has yet to rigorously take up. The urgency of specifying this relation is in part a m atter of bridge building. Posthumanism’s em- phasis upon h uman animality and objecthood understandably sets off alarm bells for t hose who are or who work on behalf of t hose struggling to be recognized as fully h uman and as rights- bearing persons before the law. Christopher Peterson observes that posthumanists therefore “cannot 140 Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century expect racial minorities simply to forget the prolonged history of their dehumanization, as if to say, ‘We are all animals, so get over it!’ ”5 Insofar as posthumanist critics have begun to address this re sis tance, there is evi- dence that they may not yet fully understand its complaint. In the intro- duction to a recent collection on “the nonhuman turn,” for instance— a collection that proposes “to name, characterize, and therefore to consoli- date” this emerging posthumanist bent— Richard Grusin suggests that skepticism t oward this turn arises from a default suspicion of materiality that is the result of social constructivism’s predominance in the past fifty years of critical discourse.6 “Participants in liberatory scholarly proj ects,” Grusin offers, tend to presume “that any appeal to nature . . . could only operate in ser vice of a defense of the status quo.”7 While Grusin’s diagno- sis may well be true in many cases, it fails to account for the most compel- ling concerns raised by scholars of social justice, as I shall attempt to demonstrate below. It also discounts the move away from strict social con- structivism that has unfolded across “liberatory” critical discourses, in- cluding work in feminist, queer, postcolonial, and critical race theory in recent years— some of which has been vital to posthumanism’s emergence.8 As we shall see in this chapter, then, the concerns that social justice theo- rists bring to posthumanism do not neatly boil down to an objection to posthumanism’s materialism per se but, rather, raise questions about its inattention to human in equality. This inattention to racism and other forms of discrimination finds ex- pression in posthumanism’s rhetorical tendency to invoke the h uman in the monolithic singular—as if, writes Alexander Weheliye, “we have now entered a stage in human development where all subjects have been granted equal access to western humanity.”9 But of course, as Aimé Césaire mem- orably observed, Western civilization has as yet never lived “a true human- ism— a humanism made to the mea sure of the world”; instead, as I have discussed in Chapter 1, u nder biopolitics, Western liberal humanism has sorted biological humans along a racially and sexually coded spectrum from the “fully” h uman to the “nonhuman.”10 A concern for social justice there- fore commits us to attend to the ways in which the human/nonhuman binary not only functions to privilege Homo sapiens above other animal spe- cies but is si mul ta neously deployed to differentiate Homo sapiens into dif- fer ent categories of l egal and social protection. In light of the lethally uneven attribution of “humanity” across Homo sapiens, posthumanism’s in- vitation to divest from Western humanism’s privileging of humanness can appear to be inequitable itself insofar as it demands a disavowal that is potentially far more costly to those whose life chances are already lowered Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century 141 by their marginalization from the human. Hence Jinthana Haritaworn urges us to ask, “for whom might identifying with the nonhuman be too risky a move?”11 On the face of it, this question raises a concern that might easily be countered. After all, it assumes that dehumanized populations have more to lose by identifying with the nonhuman whereas, arguably, divesting from the h uman promises to be costlier to t hose populations whose lives have heretofore been systematically protected by this episteme than it is to those who are oppressed and exterminated by it.12 At the very least, whether biopo liti cally condemned populations would be better off fighting for recognition under the auspices of Western humanism or, conversely, fighting to overthrow this episteme is a complicated question whose answer cannot be known in advance and whose risks may look very dif fer ent in the short and the long term. Neither is it clear how the immediate individual perils of living without full liberal recognition can or should be mea sured against the collective planetary risks of persisting in this epistemic order. What good w ill a perfected humanism be to a h uman population facing mass extinction in a climate inimical to h uman life? Nonetheless, by flagging the unequal distribution of humanness among Homo sapiens, Haritaworn’s question crucially interrupts a conflation of the human with Homo sapiens that pervades posthumanist critiques of anthro- pocentrism. The term “anthropocentrism” has been broadly used in both posthumanist and environmentalist circles to indict a myopic selfishness that is, in this critique’s strongest formulations, not just ideological but structurally inherent to human consciousness. In recent years, the strong version of this critique has become a central feature of “speculative real- ism,” a distinctive school of posthumanist theory that endeavors to think beyond h uman “finitude”— beyond, that is, the phenomenologi- cally “centered points of view” endemic to the “organic perception” of all Homo sapiens as “sensing and world- oriented beings.”13 This speculative school—which encompasses proj ects like Claire Colebrook’s efforts to en- vision thought after h uman extinction, as well as proj ects that belong to the subfield of object- oriented ontology (OOO)— proposes to think beyond the structural limitations that are physiologically built into the perceptual and cognitive apparatus of Homo sapiens. Thus in contrast to the main- stream of posthumanism, which aims to think beyond a par tic u lar (West- ern liberal humanist) episteme of the human, this school of thought attempts to imagine (if that is still the right word) an inorganic perspec- tive divorced from Homo sapiens’ embodied mind. It seeks to pioneer a per- spective that “ frees itself from folding the earth’s surface around h uman 142 Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century survival” and from what Quentin Meillassoux terms “correlationism,” the philosophical notion that our perception of “real ity” is inevitably a repre- sen ta tion shaped by (correlated with) the faculties par tic u lar to our spe- cies.14 In short, this school of posthumanism explores ways to speculatively move beyond what it views as the “anthropocentric” bias that organically limits the h uman mind. The po liti cal trou ble with this proj ect arises from the way its critique of “anthropocentrism” allows for slippage between a critique of cognitive finitude (an epistemological limitation biologically endemic to Homo sapi- ens) and a critique of environmentally exploitative practices (an ethical fail- ing ideologically endemic to Western civilization).15 The po liti cal fallout of that slippage becomes vis i ble in discussions of the Anthropocene period that blame humanity’s anthropocentrism for the environmental degradation of the planet. As Jason Moore points out, what ever its other liabilities, the term “Anthropocene” paradoxically locates the origins of the modern geohistorical shift it names in a distinctly ahistorical force: “Not class. Not capital. Not imperialism. Not even culture. But . . . the Anthropos: humanity as an undifferentiated w hole.”16 Anthropocenic discourse thus acts as if all anthros were equally “anthropocentric”—as if it is Homo sapiens, and not a certain (Western) mode of being Homo sapiens, that is destroying the Holocene and has been since “we” discovered Amer i ca, in ven ted the steam engine, exported industrialism to “our” colonies, or exploded the atom bomb (wherever the “golden spike” of the Anthropocene is to be set). By this sleight of hand, Moore objects, the idea of the Anthropocene collec- tivizes responsibility for climate change without stopping to consider the “inequalities, alienation, and vio lence inscribed in modernity’s strategic relations of power and production” that have ushered in this new geologi- cal real ity.17 In this way, critiques of the Anthropocene and of anthropo- centrism threaten to naturalize those power relations by treating the extractive economy and social injustice licensed by the West’s reigning episteme as if this w ere the organic expression of Homo sapiens’ innately limited mind— the inevitable fallout of the ineluctable humanness of human perception. In both its speculative or object- oriented and its envi- ronmentalist forms, then, the critique of anthropocentrism frames the pres ent ecological crisis as an outcome determined by a speciological rather than a cultural myopia: the product of epistemological limitations onto- logically organic to Homo sapiens rather than the contingent results of the hierarchical and extractionist episteme of modern Western civilization. As advocates for social justice point out, this faulty diagnosis not only ignores the history of h uman in equality but moreover may intensify that Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century 143 in equality. By suggesting that all humanity (Homo sapiens) is accountable for “anthropogenic” climate change, the concept of the Anthropocene jus- tifies charging minority and postcolonial peoples with responsibility for redressing an environmental crisis they have not only not engineered but whose costs they have disproportionately shouldered as the populations most heavi ly exploited by industrial capitalism and most acutely exposed to its environmental consequences (including poisoned w ater, landslides, flood- ing, and climate change– related disasters like Hurricane Katrina). Social justice– minded critics thus point out the inequity implicit in environmen- talist policies that, premised on the notion that “we h umans” are responsible for engendering a pos si ble sixth mass extinction event, have, for instance, moved to criminalize indigenous hunting practices. Or even more com- monly, where such traditional ways of life have been irrevocably interrupted by imperial and economic expansion, indigenous and postcolonial peoples have often come to rely on extractive industries that are now the target of environmental restrictions. As Elizabeth Povinelli observes, despite their devastating effects on the landscape, extractive industries are often among “the few alternatives for landholding groups to sustain their homelands, if in an often severely compromised fashion.”18 Therefore, while the effort to more tightly regulate extractive and polluting industries remains vitally impor tant, advocates of social justice contend that environmentalists must also be attentive to the ways in which even well- intentioned environmen- tal policy may perpetuate historical inequities by further burdening t hose who have benefitted the least from the ecological despoliations of Western economic “development.” Expendable Populations: “Nonhuman” ≠ Non– Homo sapiens Broadly viewed, then, current theoretical discourse has a tendency to cross its biological and ideological wires. In the instances I have just discussed, anthropocenic discourse confuses ideological and biological critique when it conflates the anthropocentric bias of the modern Western episteme with a critique of the perceptual limitations of Homo sapiens as such. If this con- flation of “the h uman” with Homo sapiens is problematic, in this section I examine how the corollary conflation— a tendency to treat “the nonhuman” as a category synonymous with non– Homo sapiens— likewise makes posthu- manism vulnerable to impor tant critiques. Indeed, I submit that, above all, it is posthumanism’s tendency to conflate “nonhuman” with non– Homo sapiens that lies at the root of its failure to recognize its deep congruencies with the antiracist proj ects of social justice. 144 Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century The commonness of this conflation of nonhuman with non– Homo sapiens is perplexing given that it is roundly condemned in one of posthumanism’s founding texts— Jacques Derrida’s collection of essays The Animal That Therefore I Am. Here Derrida rebukes the “asinanity” [bêtise] of the practice of referring to “the animal” in the monolithic singular, arguing that the definite article elides “a heterogeneous multiplicity of the living, or more precisely . . . o f organ izations of relations between the living and dead.”19 Derrida thus underscores that, like “the h uman,” “the animal” is also sorted into dif fer ent biopo liti cal and necropo liti cal molds— e. coli, cattle, wolves, and French bulldogs enjoy very dif fer ent life chances and are subject to widely differing regimes of state scrutiny, ranging from l egal protection to systematic extermination, exploitation, or lethal neglect. Derrida’s point, then, is (as we might expect) antibinaristic: oppositions like human/nonhuman oversimplify our view of extant biological and biopo liti cal realities, mocking the speciological diversity of planetary life as well as the heterogeneity of ethical relations (all of them contingent, none of them ontologically given) that or ga nize the planetary distribution of living and d ying. In highlighting the myriad relations of similarity and in equality that cut across species lines, Derrida’s essay therefore reminds us that the human/ nonhuman binary is not, in fact, a speciological distinction but rather an ideological one. Indeed, as Thoreau’s transmutationalist critique of Agas- siz insists (or as anyone even cursorily familiar with the “trees” of modern evolutionary science knows), species are not originally and immutably dif- fer ent but rather emerge and branch out from each other, fanning into shades of proximate relation or ga nized by differences of degree rather than kind (and featuring, as Derrida insists, differential rather than categori- cally dif fer ent capacities for t hings like language, culture, intelligence, feigning, etc.). The scales of differentiability that speciological evolution creates thus simply do not obey the categorical rules of binaristic logic. Which is to say that Homo sapiens, kin as it is to other species, is not the antithesis of the nonhuman; only the h uman is. “ Human” and “nonhuman” are ideological designations by which forms of being that are deemed moral and thus worthy of protection are distinguished from forms of be- ing (including object being or “nonlife”) that are deemed morally negli- gible and therefore expendable. As a designation of moral value, the h uman floats f ree of the speciological body, trailing a hierarchy of privilege that insinuates divisions both within and among species— dividing citizens from slaves and pets from pests, while conversely conflating h uman chattel with cattle, the poor with the feral, racial others with beasts. The human, in short, is an ideology masquerading as a species. Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century 145 The force of this point is therefore to suggest that posthumanism is a form of antiracism that does not consistently recognize itself as such. Brack- eting for now the speculative branch of posthumanism discussed above— that which understands itself to be attempting to move beyond Homo sapiens’ perceptual limitations— the vast majority of posthumanists work- ing in this loose- jointed field understand themselves to be engaged in an effort to deconstruct liberal humanism’s arbitrary and anti- empirical distinc- tion of h uman from nonhuman being. Broadly encompassing posthuman- ist critics working in and a fter poststructuralism (such as Derrida, Cary Wolfe, Neill Badmington), in science and technology studies (N. Kath- erine Hayles, Donna Haraway, Bruno Latour), in materialist feminism and new materialism (Jane Bennett, Rosi Braidotti, Elizabeth Grosz, Mel Chen, Stacey Alaimo), and others, this main branch of posthumanist theory seeks, in par tic u lar, to depose the drastically reductive materialist philos- ophy that subtends the transcendental liberal subject, and according to which liberal humanism equates human being with moral freedom and au- tonomy while condemning all other forms of being to a rigid biological determinism. Against this hierarchical account of the h uman, posthuman- ism’s revisionary materialism instead highlights the inextricability of human being from the animality and embodied materiality that it derogates and disavows, tracing the imbrications of mind and m atter, and natu ral and cultural agencies within the larger “vital, self- organizing, and yet non- naturalistic structure of living m atter itself.”20 Posthumanism’s effort to deconstruct liberal humanism’s hierarchy of the h uman is therefore nothing less than an effort to dismantle the racial- izing regime that has functioned to differentiate valorized ( human) from devalorized (nonhuman) Homo sapiens life. Indeed, as I shall elaborate be- low, Wynter’s work makes this connection particularly explicit by main- taining that, since at least the Middle Ages, the erection of racializing hierarchies (Christian/pagan, and l ater human/Black) has been the primary function of the Western humanist episteme. As Wynter argues, the task of social justice must therefore be to move beyond the h uman of this hu- manist tradition. But although posthumanism’s ambition to dismantle the human/nonhuman binary coincides with such antiracist endeavors to de- construct this same epistemic formation, posthumanism has been slow to recognize the relevance of race to its theoretical undertaking. Indeed, Za- kkiyah Jackson observes, “given that appositional and homologous (even co- constitutive) challenges pertaining to animality, objecthood, and thing- liness have long been established in thought examining the existential predicament of modern racial Blackness, the resounding silence in the 146 Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century posthumanist . . . lit er a tures with re spect to race is remarkable.”21 Despite sharing a common enemy— Western humanism’s hierarchical conception of the h uman—as well as a common critique—of the false empiricism that condemns nonhuman being to embodied essentialism and biologi- cal determinism— posthumanism has generally understood itself to be an ontological rather than an antiracist discourse. In one view, this failure of recognition stems from the prob lem of posthumanism’s theoretical canon. Despite its commitment to moving beyond the episteme of Western liberal humanism, posthumanists have largely gone searching for inspiration in the rec ord of Western philosophy and theory— looking to Derrida and Niklas Luhman, Michel Foucault and Giorgio Agamben, Baruch Spinoza and Gilles Deleuze, Lucretius and Niels Bohr, Charles Darwin and Silvan Tomkins. As Alexander Weheliye observes, posthumanism has thus “rarely considered cultural and po liti cal formations outside the world of [Western] Man that might offer alterna- tive versions of humanity.” More pointedly, Weheliye notes that posthu- manism’s neglect of postcolonial and minority criticism means that it has been all the less likely to come across works that could help it to theorize “the tight bonds between humanity and racializing assemblages in the modern era.”22 In this way, the Western bias of its canon may explain post- humanism’s tendency to disregard racism’s centrality to (perhaps even synonymity with) the epistemic formation that it critiques. However, posthumanism’s failure to recognize antiracist and postcolo- nial criticism as its pre ce dents may also derive from its per sis tent conflation of the nonhuman with non– Homo sapiens species. That is, despite the crit- ical care they take to identify the object of their critique as a par tic u lar episteme of the h uman, posthumanists nonetheless overwhelmingly tend to treat the nonhuman as if this were a speciological category referring to animals, plants, and objects—to, that is, non– Homo sapiens entities— rather than an ideological category referring to forms of being that have been deemed morally negligible. This slippage from the moral category “non- human” to the biological category “non– Homo sapiens” leads posthuman- ists to focus on the way Western liberal humanism has systematically devalorized nonhuman species and objects— a form of discrimination they then compare to racism and sexism rather than identifying racism and sex- ism as other names for the structurally discriminatory logic they protest.23 In other words, this slippage invites posthumanists to imagine that racism and sexism are not what they are talking about when they talk about eman- cipating the nonhuman.24 In this way, posthumanism’s tendency to treat the nonhuman as a speciological category (designating non– Homo sapiens) Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century 147 rather than a moral one (compassing dehumanized Homo sapiens as well as non– Homo sapiens beings) in turn works to obscure the relevance of anti- racist and social justice discourses to the epistemic critique posthuman- ism frames.25 This critique of posthumanism’s Western theoretical bias may register as an accusation, but it is even more pressingly an invitation to wider col- laboration. By holding more tightly onto the distinction between h uman and Homo sapiens, and between nonhuman and non– Homo sapiens, posthu- manism opens itself up to a w hole new archive of antiracist and social justice thought, and a closer conversation between these theories going forward could produce a power ful new critical matrix. To begin this conversation, my next section turns to the work of Sylvia Wynter, whose sustained critique of Western liberal humanism’s constitutive racism affords a particularly productive starting place for thinking conjunctively (although not, as we shall see, seamlessly) across posthumanist and social justice theories. As I s hall argue, putting t hese two discourses in conversation can help each to refine its philosophical commitment— and perhaps, too, the limits of that commitment—to moving beyond the Western episteme of “the human.” Mutual Encounters: Posthumanism as Social Justice Sylvia Wynter’s theory of social justice highlights the structural role that racism plays in the episteme of Western liberal humanism. Her major in- tervention into the fields of postcolonial, Black, and feminist studies has been to underscore the futility of seeking social justice within this West- ern episteme of “Man,” and to call, therefore, for a posthumanist model of social justice. For Wynter, the story of Western humanism’s development cannot be separated from the history of New World colonialism and, in par tic u lar, Black slavery. Expanding and sharpening Foucault’s genealog- ical account, Wynter tells the story of Western Man’s epistemic develop- ment in three grand movements.26 In the Middle Ages, Western Eu rope operated with a Christian hierarchy of the human, with the faithful oc- cupying the status of fully moralized beings, and pagans constituting mor- ally negligible beings. In the Re nais sance, this Christian hierarchy was partially overwritten by the ostensibly more secular idea of liberal “Man,” who is defined not by his relation to God (Christian or pagan) but rather by his relation to the state (citizen or noncitizen, bios or zoe). In the third movement, which began in the late eigh teenth century, the liberal defini- tion of “Man” was further (if again only ostensibly) secularized by the rise 148 Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century of biologism and Darwinian evolutionism. Since this “second variant of Man” was understood to originate “in Evolution rather than as before, in Divine Creation,” Wynter argues that this “biocentric” turn in Western lib- eral humanism consolidated racist hierarchy. For whereas in the Re nais- sance and M iddle Ages the h uman had been understood to have been universally made in God’s image (and only subsequently parsed into Chris- tians/pagans, or citizens/noncitizens), now the human was to be repre- sented as an unevenly developed species “in the slow pro cess of evolution from monkey into man.”27 The biologization of Western Man thus intro- duced the idea of “the ge ne tic nonhomogeneity of the h uman species,” dis- tributing Homo sapiens along a racialized spectrum from apelike (“the Negroid”) to “man” (“the Caucasian”).28 In Wynter’s hands, then, the history of Western liberal humanism is a history of factualizing—of making biologically “scientific”— a hierarchy of h uman being that has been inscribed in the Western episteme from its earliest days. Of course, this episteme is only one out of a potentially infi- nite number of stories one could spin about what it means to be h uman. And yet, as Wynter observes, by posing as an objectively empirical rather than a subjectively po liti cal, ethical, philosophical, or religious account of the human, this episteme made it “impossible for [Western thinkers] to conceive of an Other to what they called and continue to call human.”29 In the West and its former colonies, the supposed naturalism of this “genre” of human being worked alongside the hegemony of Western power to conceal the contingency of this Western ideology and to occlude the exis- tence of—as well as the possibility of inventing— alternative epistemes of the human.30 Wynter’s larger aim h ere is therefore posthumanist in the sense that her antiracist theory calls upon us to dismantle liberal humanism’s hegemonic conception of Man. Indeed, a central premise of her proj ect is that the task of redressing inequity and discrimination ultimately cannot be accom- plished by simply redistricting the h uman within the terms this episteme provides. It is not enough, she suggests, to revalorize marginalized popu- lations and thus, bit by bit, shuffle more beings into the lifeboat of moral privilege that liberal recognition affords. “Such a moralistic approach,” she writes, “is the logical result of taking our isms [racism, sexism] as isolated rather than systemic facts.”31 Instead, she insists, the proj ect of social justice requires us to move beyond the pres ent episteme of the h uman. For as her genealogy of Western humanism underscores, discrimination is structural to the Western humanistic tradition: this episteme has always operated by constituting “a negative ontological category” (pagan, foreign, Black) to Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century 149 serve as the foil to its repre sen ta tion of the human. Accordingly, Wynter argues that the plight of humanism’s dehumanized O thers, “like that of the ongoing degradation of the planetary environment, is not even posable, not to say resolvable, within the conceptual framework of our pres ent order of knowledge.”32 Thus, instead of a more pluralistic liberal politics, Wyn- ter calls for a radical break from the hierarchical and discriminatory episteme that funds liberal politics, pluralistic or other wise. “In order to call in question this ontologically subordinated function, ‘minority dis- course’ can not be merely another voice in the pres ent ongoing conversa- tion,” she insists: the challenge is not to expand the conversation but to change it.33 Linking the dehumanization of racialized, feminized, and im- poverished populations to the exploitation of animals and the destruction of the nonhuman environment, Wynter envisions something like a unified minority (or nonhuman) movement that would seek to “bring closure to our pres ent order of discourse” and inaugurate a new one no longer pre- mised upon the derogation of others.34 Wynter’s conviction that ending racism entails moving beyond (i.e., post-) humanism marks an entry for thinking about the deep congruen- cies, and perhaps equally entrenched differences, between posthumanist materialism and posthumanist social justice theory. It is, at least, arguable that posthumanist materialist discourse is where the conceptual work Wyn- ter calls for— this effort to conjure new “genres of the h uman”—is cur- rently and most actively getting done. Like Wynter, posthumanism attacks the “biocentric” or deterministic logic that arose in the eigh teenth and nineteenth centuries, and that holds that human identity is essentially coded in the body, and that bodies can in turn be located along a spec- trum of moral evolution “from monkey to man.” Against this essentialist, deterministic, and teleological account of embodiment, posthumanism’s revisionary materialism insists that acknowledging the imbrication of iden- tity with embodiment does not condemn us to erecting racist, sexist, speciesist, or any other form of moral hierarchy. Indeed, posthumanism’s materialist ontology bears little resemblance to the watchmaker’s world of bestial automata and chains of being that sub- tends the biocentric account of human identity that Wynter decries. In- stead, its founding assumption is that acknowledging the force of material embodiment does not condemn us to biological determinism. In this way, posthumanist materialism hopes to displace racial science’s taxonomic and hierarchical order of being with a monistic vision of ontological mutual- ity, or what José Muñoz terms “the potential and actual vastness of being- with.”35 As Karen Barad describes this ontology (drawing upon the theory 150 Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century of quantum entanglement), embodied being primordially consists of on- going “relations without preexisting relata.”36 Before we are anything or anyone individually, and thus before any hierarchical system of ordering differentiated entities, we exist more primally as a collective: in other words, the mutuality of being is ontologically prior to any system of order that we might impose on being’s dynamically relational field.37 Before individ- ual subjects and objects, before causes and effects, being is imbricated and unfolding, a complexly conjoint becoming. Posthumanism thus conjures what Roberto Esposito describes as “the flesh”: a “vital real ity that is ex- traneous to any kind of unitary organ ization.”38 As a dynamic material het- erogeneity that is as resistant to totalization as it is to individuation and hierarchical ordering, “the flesh” is at once “singular and communal, generic and specific, . . . u ndifferentiated and dif fer ent.”39 The deterministic essentialisms of biological racism, sexism, and specie- sism can thus find no purchase in this ontology because the materiality of being- with defies attributions of identity. Indeed (much like we have just seen in Whitman), posthumanism’s ontology defies individuality. The pri- mordial relationality of being means that any frame we put on being— any attempt to articulate a par tic u lar being out of being- with (to carve a par- tic u lar “relatum” out of quantum entanglement or an individual body out of “the flesh”)— could only ever be provisional, perspectival, a revisable construction. On this view, far from being grounded in being, individual identity can only ever appear as a kind of denial or misrepre sen ta tion of being’s primordial relationality, a pro cessualism that resists identity. Hence Jasbir Puar describes identity as an attempt “to still and quell the perpet- ual motion of assemblages, to capture and reduce them, to harness their threatening mobility.”40 This is to say that whether or not we choose to see identitarian regimes as intentionally repressive, posthumanism insists that they are, at least, inherently reductive, premised on the disavowal “of a relation of otherness that is destined to force open the identity presupposed by the body proper.”41 In posthumanism’s ontology of “the flesh,” bodies, such as they are, are irreducibly open- ended, porous, compound, relational; identities unravel into ongoing pro cesses that are riven with complexity and creative contingency; all nouns melt into verbs. Where racism and sex- ism imprison identity in the body, posthumanist materialism frees the body of identity, reimagining the “boundary” of the skin as a site of chias- matic continuity with an alien yet intimate world.42 So the question I have been posing is this: Could posthumanism be de- scribing something like the posthumanist “genre of the h uman” that Wynter envisions? To what extent might posthumanist materialism and Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century 151 posthumanist social justice be thought together as two fronts in the same fight against liberal humanism’s hegemonic hold on “the h uman”? The summary of t hese two theories that I have just offered attempts to high- light their common interests: posthumanist materialism explodes the dis- criminatory hierarchy of being that Wynter diagnoses as structural to the Western episteme she opposes. But to answer the question of their con- gruency properly, we would have to know whether posthumanist materi- alism and posthumanist social justice oppose the same thing when they set themselves in opposition to liberal humanism. And the answer to this ques- tion, which I shall elaborate in my discussions below, will be no, they don’t. That is, when we put these theories in conversation it becomes clear that Wynter ultimately endorses humanism’s faith that h uman life is uniquely endowed with freedom and moral import, whereas posthuman- ist materialism consistently challenges this premise. But if the preserva- tion of h uman exceptionalism suggests that Wynter’s theory does not wholly break with the Western liberal humanism it critiques, posthuman- ist theory likewise seeks to conserve key aspects of this episteme. As I shall elaborate, despite the anti- individualism of its relational ontology, posthu- manism’s politics remain deeply indebted to the individualistic institu- tions of modern liberal democracy. In outlining these two dif fer ent conservative tendencies below I will be suggesting why it makes sense to view them as theoretical prob lems for the ostensibly posthumanist and posthumanist critical traditions in which they respectively arise. Ultimately, however, I will suggest in my Coda why falling short of a radical break from liberal humanism might set desirable or even necessary limits on our posthumanism. Humanism’s Holdovers in Posthumanism For its part, posthumanism sets itself up in opposition to liberal human- ism’s transcendental subject; however, this opposition does not extend to a rejection of the liberal po liti cal institutions that w ere or ga nized to honor and accommodate the liberal humanist subject. On the contrary, posthu- manists regularly gloss the mutuality of being that their ontology discov- ers as an invitation to a pluralistic expansion of demo cratic politics. From Esposito’s “affirmative” biopolitics to Latour’s “parliament of things” to Levi Bryant’s “democracy of objects,” posthumanist ontologies routinely double as blueprints for a more pluralistic (a more- than- human) demo cratic politics whose constituency will fi nally encompass all beings without exclusion. 152 Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century On this description, the material connectedness of human and nonhu- man being in the primordiality of being- with becomes an argument for extending ethical recognition to nonhuman being on the model of demo- cratic liberalization. As Jane Bennett puts this thought, “If human culture is inextricably enmeshed with vibrant, nonhuman agencies, and if h uman intentionality can be agentic only if accompanied by a vast entourage of nonhumans, then it seems that the appropriate unit of analy sis for demo- cratic theory is neither the individual human nor the human collective but the (ontologically heterogeneous) ‘public.’ . . . Surely the scope of democ- ratization can be broadened to acknowledge more nonhumans in more ways, in something like the ways in which we have come to hear the po- liti cal voices of other h umans formerly on the outs.”43 The logic, then, of this vision of posthumanist politics imagines that the enmeshed and de- pendent nature of human being argues for extending re spect and recogni- tion to devalued forms of being through which, it turns out, human life and agency move. Between the ontology outlined in the first part of this quote and the pluralism endorsed after the ellipses, we move from a pro- cessual materialism that deconstructs individual identity to a politics that is premised upon individual recognition. Such a comprehensively inclusive politics would seem to constitute a ma- jor ethical advancement— how could it not?— and yet it is not immedi- ately clear how posthumanism’s ontology supports the pluralistic politics posthumanists invoke. Posthumanism, as we have seen, begins by point- ing to the pro cessual nature of being, recasting apparently solid objects as open- ended pro cesses. But this pro cessual ontology creates difficulties for any politics we would construct on its back. The fact of process— what Ben- nett calls the “public” but what we might more accurately, by Bennett’s lights, view as the “publicity” or collectively “enmeshed” nature of all be- ing—is not, after all, a “unit of analy sis” but, on the contrary, an account of the ideological contingency (the fictionality) of any unit whatsoever. Nouns like “public” and noun phrases like “a vast entourage of nonhu- mans” help Bennett manage the contradiction between her pro cessualism and the demo cratic theory she turns to by precipitating the pro cessual as- semblage of being back into a countable array of discrete entities with self- possessed “voices” and po liti cal interests. Bennett’s vision for a broadened democracy that would “consult nonhumans more closely” and “listen and respond more carefully to their outbreaks, objections, testimo- nies, and propositions” thus seems like an ethically admirable program that nonetheless sacrifices the central insight of her posthumanist materi- alism. For her compelling account of agency as a force distributed across Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century 153 human and nonhuman actants—an account that thereby deconstructs differences between human and nonhuman, self and other, vital subjectiv- ity and “vibrant” materiality— suggests, to the contrary, that we exist in a world that is not divisible into speakers and listeners. Indeed, even in Barad’s quantum ontology— which does suggest that we might frame lo- cal “units of analy sis” that temporarily resolve “intra- action” into “inter- action”—it is not clear that any entity would have the longevity, let alone the personality, sufficient to support anything we could call an objection, testimony, or proposition. Versions of this contradiction between posthumanism’s pro cessual on- tology and its liberal politics recur throughout posthumanist work. It shows up, for instance, in Barad’s injunction to “intra- act responsibly,” which seems to commit us to an impossibility by enjoining us to act ethically (make choices, take into account) t oward a mode of relation (“intra- action”) which Barad defines as belonging to a state of entanglement that is onto- logically prior to the differentiation between subjects and objects, or c auses and effects. But, of course, in this state of entanglement ethical obligation has nothing or no one to which it might attach.44 As Matt Taylor argues in his critique of Latour’s “parliament of things,” ontological theories like these fail to explain how we are meant to adjudicate “between a pro cessual relationality that precedes entities, on the one hand, and a procedural pol- itics or ethics between entities, on the other.”45 There is, in other words, no way to navigate between the ontology of being- with and the unit- based calculus of liberal politics and ethics—at least, t here is no way to effect this translation that does not simply betray the mutuality of being that post- humanism champions. Indeed, it seems particularly dubious that an on- tology that is, as posthumanists regularly stress, distinctly inimical to the figure of the sovereign and autonomous liberal self could be translated without loss into an expanded liberal politics. Thus while posthumanist plans for incorporating non– Homo sapiens into liberal demo cratic politics seem laudible, they also seem curiously perverse, for invariably they shunt us back into liberal, ethical, and po liti cal grammars in which the radical imbrication of being is reduced to interactions between individual beings whose inherent sovereignty, freedom, and autonomy demand to be recognized. In this sense, posthumanism’s habit of positioning itself as an emancipatory discourse working in the pluralizing tradition of abolition- ism and first- wave feminism arguably undersells the radicalism of its philosophy. In fact, this is one impor tant area in which a more sustained engage- ment with social justice theory could help posthumanism to refine its 154 Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century understanding of its own proj ect. Confirming Wynter’s sense of the acute limitations of trying to seek social justice within the terms of the Western episteme, recent work in indigenous studies has highlighted the epistemic coerciveness of liberalism’s regime of rights and recognition. These studies reveal the steep price of admission exacted from indigenous communities seeking po liti cal recognition.46 As they demonstrate, the very pro cess of establishing claims to rights and sovereignty often subjects in- digenous groups to a kind of epistemic neo co lo nial ism, forcing them to abandon or reframe their traditional cultural conceptions of subjectivity, kinship, and community with the nonhuman environment so as to bring them into alignment with liberal accounts of personhood, race, and terri- tory. Indeed, Taiaiake Alfred observes, even multiculturally minded liberal policies tend to resolve any “disconnect between [their] rights- based lib- eral philosophical orientation and the fundamentals of Indigenous teach- ings and worldviews” at the latter’s expense. In this way, the pro cess of securing tribal rights can end up coercing indigenous peoples to relinquish “traditional notions of belonging . . . and [replace] them with race and gender- based notions of membership designed to reconstitute Indigenous people in ways acceptable to Euroamerican ideologies.”47 Over generations— and, more pointedly, as a result of po liti cal policies ostensibly designed to accommodate cultural difference— indigenous peoples can thus come to “hold ideas about identity and their nationhood which reflect colonial atti- tudes,” losing touch with an indigenous “worldview that is illuminated by notions of fluidity [and] flux.”48 Kim TallBear echoes this critique in her recent study of the popular- ization of DNA testing in North Amer i ca as a mechanism for establishing claims to tribal belonging. Although this practice offers seemingly straight- forward and objective answers to questions about tribal belonging, TallBear shows how it does so by reducing tribal identity to a ge ne tic fingerprint, drastically simplifying the intricate interplay of both genealogical and cul- tural inheritances (including what TallBear describes as the “sense of inex- plicable inheritance”) that has traditionally s haped the logic of tribal belonging. DNA testing therefore proposes to convert a complexly biocul- tural phenomenon into a set of “par tic u lar ideas and vocabularies of race, ethnicity, nation, family, and tribe” that have been codified by the Western liberal- raciological episteme over the past two hundred years. But “for and by whom are such categories defined?” TallBear inquires. “How have continental- level race categories come to matter? And why do they matter more than the ‘ peoples’ that condition indigenous narratives, knowledges, and claims?”49 Thus, like Alfred, TallBear calls attention to the ways in Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century 155 which the tools for gaining po liti cal recognition often subject non- Western peoples and epistemes to a kind of neo co lo nial disciplining. By underscor- ing the epistemic price of liberal inclusion— what Elizabeth Povinelli dubs “the cunning of recognition”— indigenous social justice studies like t hese can serve to alert posthumanists to the ways in which its focus on extend- ing liberal rights and recognition to nonhuman beings may be hostile to the more radical epistemic transformation— the emancipation of being- with— that they ultimately seek.50 Indeed, studies of recognition’s “cunning” coercions suggest that post- humanism’s faith in liberal recognition might not simply sell short its pro- cessualist ontology but, rather, sell it out. By demonstrating how liberal recognition can act as a straightjacket as much as a means to liberation, Alfred, TallBear, and Povinelli help us to see how posthumanism’s advo- cacy for nonhuman recognition and inclusion may in fact be antithetical to the kind of change its ontology tasks us with when it suggests that inclu- sion is, for better or worse, inescapable— that we are always already onto- logically conjoined w hether or not we recognize each other as equals. This is to suggest, as Cary Wolfe also reminds us, that posthumanist materialism in fact has nothing to do with the question of which bodies “ matter” (Homo sapiens? All primates? All animals? Black lives? All lives?).51 That is, its key proposition is not to champion the sovereignty (the entitlement to freedom, rights, and recognition) of nonhuman beings but rather to disclose the fictionality of sovereignty as such in a material world in which every being is relationally constituted in and through the being of others. But if these social justice critiques of liberal politics help us to discern the conservatism of posthumanism’s faith in liberal recognition, posthu- manism’s critique of human exceptionalism can, conversely, help us to dis- cern the humanism that still haunts even Wynter’s ostensibly posthumanist theory of social justice. Although Wynter calls out the discriminatory hi- erarchy that lies at the heart of the Western liberal humanist tradition, the alternative “genre of the h uman” that she outlines ultimately looks a lot like the liberal humanist subject she proposes to displace. Wynter’s ge- nealogy of Western Man pivots on the notion that “the h uman” is a rep- resentation—an enunciation that passes itself off as a natu ral fact. Seizing on this demonstration of humanity’s capacity for self- narration (which she terms, borrowing from Frantz Fanon, “sociogeny”), Wynter argues that this capacity marks out human being as exceptional to nature. As she ex- plains, sociogeny is an endowment unique to Homo sapiens, which affords this species an additional “nonphysical princi ple of causality”— the power to self- generate cultural codes that prescribe our beliefs and be hav iors for 156 Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century us over and above the promptings of our inherited ge ne tic code.52 Socio- geny thus liberates human action from material causation: in contrast to the “purely biological” being of other species (whose identities, she argues, “are genet ically preprescribed for them”), we humans “are si mul ta neously story- telling and biological beings.”53 For Wynter, this unique speciological ca- pacity not only affords Homo sapiens an intrinsic moral freedom lacking in all other forms of being, but it si mul ta neously guarantees the moral equal- ity of all Homo sapiens to each other, for if Homo sapiens are sociogenic (self- creating) by definition, this speciological trait means that no mem- ber of the species could be genet ically “preprescribed” by race or sex. For Wynters, then, sociogeny not only makes alternative genres of the human pos si ble (by exposing Western humanism’s genre of the human to be a so- ciogenic rather than an organic fact), but it also (and somewhat paradoxi- cally) provides an ostensibly biological justification for upholding the exceptional autonomy of all Homo sapiens (as the only species endowed with this special power). The irony h ere is thus that Wynter’s account of sociogeny reproduces a version of the same moral hierarchy and “biocentric” reasoning that she denounces in the Western episteme of Man. Indeed, it’s not hard to hear the echo of racism’s biological determinism in her cele bration of h uman exceptionalism. Scientific racists like Josiah Nott also maintain that human beings are uniquely free of the biological determinism that rules lesser forms of being. And although clearly Nott differs from Wynter insofar as he maintains that this capacity is endemic to only certain races of Homo sapiens and not the whole species, the underl ying logic of biological exceptionalism— the proposition that select organisms are auto- instituting while all o thers are physiologically determined— remains the same in both Nott’s and Wynter’s accounts of the human. That Nott’s racism and Wyn- ter’s antiracism are both able to adopt the same criterion to such differing ends underscores the contingency of the standards by which racial or spe- ciological “autonomy” is defined. That is, what ever we might choose to count as evidence of a capacity for sociogenic self- making must always it- self be an artifact of culture rather than a strictly biological fact. Thus the definition of what qualifies as “articulate” speech as opposed to animalis- tic noise, “rational” thought as opposed to brutish self- interest, or “cul- tured” be hav ior as opposed to instinctive action may be— and historically has been— stipulated and gerrymandered as power sees fit. Indeed, that sociogeny yields its own version of the “cunning of recog- nition” is a lesson brought home to us by Frederick Douglass, who recog- nizes in its discrimination of speech from noise a key to the “blood- stained Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century 157 gate of slavery.” At the start of the Narrative, Douglass harrowingly recalls witnessing his aunt Hester’s torture at the hands of Captain Anthony, dur- ing which “no words, no tears, no prayers, from his gory victim, seemed to move his iron heart from its bloody purpose.” As numerous critics have pointed out, Douglass’s masterful per for mance of literacy in the prose of this scene, and throughout the Narrative, functions as a power ful testa- ment to his humanity, demonstrating his rational intelligence. And yet this primal scene si mul ta neously labors to expose the brutal capriciousness of language as a test of humanity in the first place. Douglass’s depiction of Anthony’s indifference to Hester’s “words,” “prayers,” and “heart- rending shrieks” lays bare the ease with which Anthony dismisses her utterances as merely instinctive, animalistic noises (morally indistinguishable from the bellows of the cow whose slaughter would have furnished the “blood- clotted cowskin” at this scene’s center).54 Douglass’s ambivalence in this scene— his implicit appeal to language as expressive of moral being and simultaneous critique of the ease with which language may be dismissed as mere sound— confronts us with what posthumanists describe as the necessarily ideological, rather than empiri- cal, nature of any distinction between h uman (autonomous, sociogenic) and nonhuman (embodied, “purely biological”) life. Thus Derrida argues that correcting the injustice this arbitrary distinction inscribes into being is “not just a matter of giving back to the animal what ever it has been re- fused” (by, for instance, demonstrating vari ous animals’ capacities for “speech, reason, experience of death, mourning, culture” and so forth); in- stead the challenge is “a m atter of questioning oneself concerning the axiom that permits one to accord purely and simply to the h uman or ra- tional animal that which one holds the just plain animal to be deprived of.”55 It is not enough, in other words, to discover that hitherto excluded beings are capable of “testimony” (to return to Bennett’s word). To do this is simply to keep moving the chains down the field of humanism when the task, instead, is to escape the rules of its game. Thus Derrida demands that instead of trying to perfect the axiom by which we distinguish which ut- terances count as “speech,” which events count as “actions,” or which be- ings count as “ free,” we ought to be asking ourselves whose interests that axiom serves. But if posthumanism’s critique of human exceptionalism thus calls into question Wynter’s faith in, and commitment to, Homo sapiens’s sociogenic autonomy, its skepticism also arguably forwards Wynter’s larger proj ect. Weheliye suggests that Wynter’s effort to think “freedom beyond the world of Man” commits us to listening for “language that does not rely on 158 Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century linguistic structures, at least not primarily, to convey meaning . . . trans- parent to the world of Man.”56 Taking up this invitation (and perhaps tak- ing it farther than Weheliye means it to go), we might conclude that Wynter’s desire for a posthumanist genre of the human not only commits us to listening for language among those not already counted as human but also urges us to listen for the nonhumanity of h uman language. Put differ- ently, instead of imagining that sociogeny (language, culture) is the antith- esis of ge ne tic determinism, we can imagine it as a kind of emergent complication within biological order. After all, if the capacity for sociogeny is somehow in Homo sapiens’ “nature,” then the degree of freedom it intro- duces into human be hav ior is not a negation of humanity’s ge ne tic inheri- tance but an expression of it. Using this description, then, a capacity for sociogeny does not designate a transcendental freedom but rather intro- duces a degree of play—of unpredictability or creativity— into speciological be hav ior. From this perspective, human being still exceeds the embodied determinism which, for Wynter, characterizes racist “biocentrism”; how- ever, that freedom no longer liberates h uman being from its embodiment, categorically distinguishing Homo sapiens from non– Homo sapiens being. When we begin to think sociogeny as an embodied trait in this way, it takes on the double movement of Derrida’s posthumanist vision, designating a capacity that is something less than the absolute “ human” freedom human- ism had posited, and therefore identifying something that is potentially more widely shared, to varying degrees, among the diversity of animal life. Again, my sense is that adopting a more posthumanist view of the h uman would clarify and strengthen Wynter’s proj ect. Exorcising the h uman ex- ceptionalism from her vision brings it a step closer to realizing her goal of articulating a new episteme that embraces the materiality of “the flesh- and- blood individual subject.”57 Indeed, as Katherine McKittrick demon- strates, Wynter regularly suggests that decolonizing Western Man w ill mean learning to see how “our flesh and blood and brain m atter” work to “unsettle and enmesh the other wise bifurcated and dichotomized episte- mological clusters of science and creativity,” or biological and sociogenic production.58 Moreover, posthumanism’s view of the conjugation of free- dom with embodiment forwards Wynter’s ambition to “move us t oward a . . . correlated human species, and eco- systemic ethic.”59 Throughout her work, Wynter calls attention to the ways in which the racism, sexism, and colonialism of the modern era are structurally conjoined with the necrop- olitics of the sixth extinction event now underway. All of these phenom- ena, she argues, arise from the same source: liberal humanism’s hierarchical division of being. They are, in other words, one prob lem with several Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century 159 heads: an integrated “poverty- hunger- habitat- energy- trade- population- atmosphere- waste- resource prob lem.”60 Wynter’s sense that social injus- tice and environmental destruction are systemic to the Western genre of “the human” underscores the urgency of decommissioning this episteme’s foundational move of disavowing human materiality and thus segregating “ human” being from the entangled being- with of planetary life. By t hese routes, Wynter’s critique of Western Man and posthumanism’s materialist ontology begin to coalesce more clearly. The essential inter- vention of both proj ects— what constitutes their departure from Western humanism—is their effort to renounce the transcendentally autonomous human subject whose freedom is constituted through the derogation (the racialization/animalization/objectification) of embodied life. Both thus aim to deconstruct this hegemonic episteme—to disassemble, and not simply redistrict, the bounds of the h uman as we know it. Moreover, when read through one another, each of these proj ects helps the other to see where their work threatens to collapse back into the hierarchical ontology they wish to revise— where, for instance, posthumanism’s liberal politics and Wynter’s human exceptionalism betray their primary commitments to rei- magining h uman being as a mode of being- with in which the distinction human/nonhuman no longer holds. From a certain perspective, this coalescing vision of a thoroughly decolonized posthumanism promises to be radically liberatory. Ultimately pointing beyond the liberal politics of pluralism, t hese posthumanist proj ects challenge us to inaugurate a new episteme made to the mea- sure not just of “Man” nor Homo sapiens nor even all biological life, but to the heterogeneous and radiantly interanimated ontology of worldly being. Unleashing the revolutionary generosity unwittingly implicit in Césaire’s appeal, they urge us to conceive a po liti cal ethics truly “made to the mea sure of the world”—an episteme no longer premised upon the manufacture of a “lesser” class of devalued and exploitable being but, rather, one that embraces all being as one densely conjoined world. Viewed from another angle, however, it is not clear that liberation is a term that can meaningfully be applied to an ontology of entanglement. Liberation, as we know it, implies disentanglement—an unburdening that restores us to a natu ral state of freedom, honoring our inherent right, as autonomous selves, to self- sovereignty. But none of t hese t hings— freedom, autonomy, sovereignty, the singular “self”— remain readily legible in a world in which being is primordially relational. In light of this prob lem, the holdovers of humanism within these posthu- manistic discourses may, after all, prove to be strategic inconsistencies. As 160 Race and Materiality in the Twenty- First Century my readings of Douglass, Thoreau, and Whitman have tried to underscore, the ontology of embodiment has distinctly illiberal tendencies, undermin- ing appeals to h uman rights, agency, and selfhood as we understand t hese things. Thus while I began this chapter by suggesting that antislavery materialism may be useful to us today by helping to spotlight the absence of race as a critical term in con temporary posthumanist theory, I’d like to propose now that it also lights up a further aporia in our pres ent discourse. There is an evident tension in these antebellum proj ects—in the ambiva- lence with which Douglass embraces animality, aware of the costs of dehu- manization; in the fatalism with which Thoreau appeals to evolutionary change despite his desire to believe in the power of conscientious action; and in the manic optimism with which Whitman welcomes the prospect of his own dissolution into an unspooling material cosmos. The unease we find h ere stems from the incommensurability of t hese materialist visions with the liberal and romantic ideals t hese authors also held. In these ways, these authors’ antislavery materialisms confront us with the dreams deferred by a more rigorously materialist account of being. And thus, although critics like Latour and Wynter often frame their work as attempts to construct an empirical episteme that w ill fi nally be grounded in material fact rather than in the truths that ( human, Western) power in- vents, we must learn to assess this episteme by a further standard. The question before us is not simply w hether a materialist, posthumanist on- tology gives us a truer, more empirically accurate account of real ity. For whether or not it is truer, the question remains w hether the episteme this ontology sponsors is ethically preferable to the humanism it seeks to dis- place. I turn to this question, via antislavery materialism, in the Coda.