ID Transcendentalist SelJ-Examination and Autobiographical Tradition UnZoveZy, nay, IrightluZ is the solitude 01 the souZ which is without Cod in the worZd. -Emerson A recent critic of Melville has rightly remarked that "the American writer continually sings a 'Song of Myself.''' 1 A number of American literary classics are autobiographies, from Benjamin Franklin to Richard Wright. In Afro-American liter- ature, autobiography is the dominant genre; the tradition of the slave narratives of the nineteenth century has its contem- porary analogues in Eldridge Cleaver and Malcolm X. Much of the best American fiction is also first-person narrative, in which the persona often seems strongly autobiographical: Moby- Dick, The Great Gatsby, The Sun Also Rises, and Invisible Man are representative examples. American poetry is over- whelmingly lyric; American drama-the genre least compatible with the autobiographical impulse-virtually nonexistent be- fore the First World War. It is not hard to conceive of reasons for the American pre- occupation with the self. First, the ideology of individualism encourages interest in the careers of single persons, especially those which re-enact such culture myths as the American dream of success or the pioneer's conquest of nature. Another stimulus has been the tradition of religious self-examination imported 1 Edgar A. Dryden, Melville's Thematics 01 Form: The Creat Art 01 Telling the Truth (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1968), p. 19· 266 The First Person from Europe in the colonial period, which produced the Personal Narrative of jonathan Edwards, the Journal of John Woolman and countless other pious diaries and conversion nar- ratives running well into the nineteenth century. During that century, in the third place, the interest in self was quickened by the influence of the romantic movement, under whose auspices was first produced in America a literature worthy of the name, and which still remains our dominant tradition. It was during the romantic era that the diary and the autobiography became significant as literary forms, on both sides of the Atlantic. More puzzling than the presence of a strong autobiographic tendency in American writing is the lack of critical attention to it. Though individualism as a subject and as a life-style for American authors has long been a topic of analysis, seldom has it been discussed in relation to rhetoric and genre except to support the very general thesis that American writing is ori- ented against tradition and towards experience and experimento Only in the last few years has there arisen a significant body of scholarship on the characteristic techniques, motifs, and con- ventions in American autobiographical writing.2 The most logical explanation for prior neglect is simply the relative underdevelopment of theoretical criticism of autobiography. Modern formalist criticism was naturally first attracted to poetry, then to drama and prose fiction; only now that it has ceased to make significant new advances in those areas has it turned its attention to less purely aesthetic genres.3 21 am thinking especially of Robert Sayre, The Examined Self: Ben- jamin Franklin, Henry Adams, Henry James (Princeton: Princeton Uni- ve~sity Press, 1964); Daniel B. Shea Jr., Spiritual Autobiography in Early America (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1968); and David L. Min- ter, The Interpreted Design as a Structural Principie in American Prose (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1969), which deals broadly with first- person narrative. 3 For the theory of criticism of autobiography, the works which have helped me most have been Roy Pascal, Design and Truth in Autobiog- raPhy (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1960); John Morris, Versions Self-Examination and Autobiographical Tradition So far the new scholarship in American autobiographical writing has dealt mainly with individual examples; a complete survey is called foro When it is written, the American romantic period, and particularly the Transcendentalist movement, is sure to come in for extended treatment. To begin with, it was in Transcendentalist writing that the three traditions just men- tioned-spiritual self-examination, romantic self-consciousness, and democratic individualism--converged for the first time in American history, with the result that the self became a more important entity for the Transcendentalists than for any of their forbears. They were acutely conscious of living in "the age of the first person singular," when, as Emerson put it, the poet is not content to see how "Fair hangs the apple from the rock," "What music a sunbeam awoke in the groves," nor of Hardi- knute, how "Stately stept he east the wa, And stately stept he west," but he now revolves, What is the apple to me? and what the birds to me? and what is Hardiknute to me? and what am I? [W, XII, 312] This appraisal, shared by all the Transcendentalists, led them to take great interest in literary representations of the self, in accordance with Schiller's maxim that whereas the "simple" or primitive poet merely imitates Nature, the "sentimental" or modern poet "reflects on the impression produced on him by objects; and it is only on this reflection that his poetic force is based." 4 The Transcendentalists tended to disdain the novel, somewhat moralistically, as frivolous and artificial, but they 01 the Sell: Studies in English Autobiography Irom John Bunyan to John Stuart Mili (New York: Basic Books, 1966); Wayne Shumaker, English Autobiography: Its Emergence, Materials, and Form (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1954); and Francis Hart, "Notes for an Anatomy of Modern Autohiography," New Literary History, 1 (1970),485-511. 4 "Simple and Sentimental Poetry," Essays Aesthetical and Philosophical (London: George Bell, 1884), p. 289. The First Person appreciated fiction as a revelation of character. "True" histories they prized. Emerson and Alcott agreed in 1838 that auto- biography was the best kind of book (lMN, V, 99). "Is not the poet bound to write his own biography?" Thoreau asked. "Is there any other work for him but a good journal?" (lT, X, 115). "Writing is worthless except as the record of alife," declared Margaret Fuller. One's "book should be only an indi- cation of himself." 5 Small wonder, then, that the editorial pref- ace to The Dial concluded with the resolution "not to multi- ply books, but to report life": Our resources are therefore not so much the pens of practised writ- ers, as the discourse of the living, and the portfolios which friend- ship has opened to uso From the beautiful recesses of private thought; from the experience and hopes of spirits which are with- drawing from all old forms; and seeking in all that is new some- what to meet their inappeasable longings; from the secret con fes- sion of genius afraid to trust itself to aught but sympathy; from the conversations of fervid and mystical pietists; from tear-stained diaries of sorrow and passion; from the manuscripts of young poets; and from the records of youthful taste commenting on old works of art, we hope to draw thoughts and feelings, which being alive can impart life. [Tr, p. 250] Such a statement of intent, however, conveys a misleading impression of the kind of writing the Transcendentalists actu- ally did. This is a second, more idiosyncratic aspect of their handling of the first person which invites analysis. Although they attached great theoretical importance to the self, most of what they themselves wrote seems quite impersonal, including their own private journals. Their poetry is highly intellectual; their prose metaphysical rather than familiar. The most egoistic movement in American literary history produced no first-rate autobiography, unless one counts Walden as such. The same is even more embarrassingly true of Transcendentalist attempts at 5 Lite Without and Lite Within, ed. Arthur B. Fuller (Boston: Brown, Taggard and Chase, 1860), p. 26. Sell-Examination and Autobiographical Tradition autobiographical fiction: Brownson's Charles Elwood, William Channing's Emest the Seeker, Ellery Channing's The Youth 01 the Poet and the Painter, and Margaret Fuller's short stories. The great journals of Emerson and Thoreau are superior specimens of their kind, but becau se of their brilliance of thought and description, not for their intimate disclosures. The caveat with which Richard Henry Dana, Jr., prefaces his journal might apply to the Transcendentalists also: "1 shaIl set down nothing here which is untrue," he says, but some things he will keep to himself, for "our Maker knows & each man's own soul knows that there are thoughts & intents of the heart, sometimes put forth in act, which no man would be willing or need or ought to open to all observers." 6 Though one certainly finds differences among Transcenden- talists, such as Emerson and Thoreau, in respect to personal tone, alI shared a basic inhibition about revealing themselves. It was not so much a Victorian sense of propriety which restrained them, although that did enter in, as it was a matter of principIe. If the first axiom of Transcendentalist thought was that the individual is potentially divine, the second was that the individual is valuable only sub specie aeternatis, in his uni- versal aspects. At the meetings of the Transcendental Club, Alcott recaIled, "It was the fashion to speak against personality . . . and the favorite phrase was 'Impersonality.''' 7 Emerson maintained simultaneously that "the soul's emphasis is always right" (W, 11, 145) and that "the individual is always mistaken" (W, 111, 69). This led to a rather strict self-censorship policy. "That which is individual & remains individual in my experi- 6 The fournal 01 Richard Henry Dana, fr., ed. Robert F. Lucid (Cam- bridge: Harvard University Press), 1, 3. 7 "Alcott's 'Conversation' on the Transcendental Club and The Dial," ed. Clarence Gohdes, American Literature, 3 (1931), 17. Alcott's biographers point out that he disagreed with Emerson on the subject of personality, believing-especially in his later years-in a more personal relation be- tween individual and God than Emerson would admito The First Person ence is of no value," he writes in his journal. "What is fit to engage me & so engage others permanently, is what has put off its weeds of time & place & personal relation" (IMN, VII, 65)' Emerson was somewhat distressed by the "mountainous ME" which Margaret Fuller projected (Ossoli, 1, 236). But Fuller herself al so favored a certain amount of literary restraint. "You may tell the world at large what you please," she advised a young essayist, "if you make it of universal importance by transporting it into the field of general human interest. But your private griefs, merely as yours, belong to yourself, your nearest friends, to Heaven and to nature." 8 The criterion of representativeness, however, did not prevent the Transcendentalists from the appreciation and continual practice of first-person writing. Emerson made the definitive comment on this score in his distinction between true and false subjectivity. A writer's use of the "1," he says in "Thoughts on Modern Literature," is to be welcomed or censured according to whether his work "leads us to Nature, or to the person of the writer. The great always introduce us to facts: small men introduce us always to themselves. The great man, even whilst he relates a private fact personal to him, is really leading us away from him to an universal experience" (W, XII, 314-315). Though here as always Emerson deprecates subjective experi- ence as such in favor of the universal truth it contains, he gives his general approval to the "subjectiveness" of modern litera- ture as a hopeful sign, marking "the uprise of the soul" (313). Thus the leading Transcendentalists, despite their distrust of egoism, relied heavily on first-person approaches and thereby helped to prepare the way for the culmination of romantic egoism in America, Leaves 01 Grass. This is the third and most far-reaching reason why Transcendentalist writing is of interest to the historian of American self-consciousness. Though its definition of the self was too pietistic to produce a full-blooded tradition of autobiography, the notion of the link (and the discrepancy) between the personal ''1'' and the cosmic "1" did 8 Lite Without and Lite Within, p. 69. Self-Examination and Autobiographical Tradition 27 1 lead to some interesting and significant first-person strategies, which as we shall see later on, became an integral part of the American literary heritage through Walden and Leaves 01 Grass. The Transcendentalist paradox of self-preoccupation versus self-transcendence has its origins in the three traditions of de m- oratic, romantic, and (especially) Protestant thought. As stu- dents of romanticism have pointed out, "Subjectivity was not the program but the inescapable condition of romanticism," the central problem which it had to confront and overcome as a result of the legacy of eighteenth century mechanism, which seemed to alienate the human spirit from the universe.9 In romanticist literature, therefore, subjectivity "becomes the sub- ject of poems which qua poetry seek to transmute it," as Geoffrey Hartman says.10 The poet's basic faith is that if only he looks far enough inward, or merges himself with the world- soul through nature, he will reach the unconscious or universal. Thus for Wordsworth and Coleridge, just as for Emerson and Thoreau, the sense of being spiritually isolated is tragic, and Byron is the most somber of aH the English romantics in those works which are most obsessively self-conscious. English and American romantics, in general, seem to have been more aware of the risks of self-consciousness than their European counter- parts, which is perhaps why they did not accept the epithet "romantic." 11 9 Robert Langbaum, The Poetry o{ Experience (New York: Norton, 1963), p. 28. 10 "Romanticism and 'Anti-Self-Consciousness,''' in Harold Bloom, ed., Romanticism and Consciousness (New York: Norton, 1970), p. 53. Several other essays in this exceIlent colIection, notably Bloom's "The Internali- zation of Quest-Romance," also shed light on the subject. For comparisons between English, French, and German romanticism vis-a-vis individualism and self-consciousness, see Lillian Furst, Romanticism in Perspective (New York: Sto Martin's Press, 1969), p. 55-115. 11 Those Transcendentalists who use the term, Emerson and FulIer, folIowing Goethe, declare a preference for the "Classic" over the "Ro- The First Person The tradition of religious confessional valued the personal self even less than the romantic, inasmuch as the writer was chiefiy preoccupied with seeing his life in relation to a paradigm of grace. He attached no intrinsic importance, for example, to originality, individualism, literary innovation; if anything, these betokened vanity or perverseness. The religious auto- biographer, as Daniel Shea says of the Puritans, tended to make "Providence the chief character of his narrative, his own life merely the setting for its actions." 12 That is why so many con- version narratives read like imitations of each other, even those of sorne writers with demonstrable literary talent, like Edward Taylor. The spiritual journal was less likely to become stereo- typed, being more taken up with day-to-day events, but it too was interested in these events not for their own sake but as providential tokens. "Democratic individualism," finally, is also something of an oxymoron. It means mass rule as much as it does individual freedom. Tocqueville even went so far as to claim that "free- dom of opinion does not exist in America"- which he thought was the reason why America had not produced any great writers.13 The broadening of the base of political power that took place during the jacksonian era was an acknowledgment of the dignity of the individual, but it also ensured that the par- ticular citizen would have less infiuence in the political process than formerly. Most of the Transcendentalists found this trend somewhat confusing (to the extent that they thought about it mantie," associating the first with universality and the seeond with idio- syncratic eaprice on the writer's part (W, XII, 303-305; Lite Without and Lite Within, pp. 129-131). 12 Spiritual Autobiography in Early America, p. 119. An earlier dis- cussion which deals with the individual versus typical qualities of the diary and the autobigraphy in early America is Kenneth Murdock, Literature and Theology in Colonial New England (New York: Harper, 1963), pp. 99-135. 13 Democracy in America, ed. Phillips Bradley (New York: Knopf, 1945), 1,275· Self-Examination and Autobiographical Tradition at aH), because their notion of the dignity of the individual was conditioned by an elitist upbringing (either moral elitism or social elitism or both), which also made them feel threatened by "the people" or "the great mass" as an actual force. At heart, most of them were for natural aristocracy rather than egalitari- anism. At the same time, individualism for them had to be vali- dated by its representativeness: genius is a larger imbiding of the common heart; civil disobedience must be grounded on divine law, and so forth. This awareness is what differentiates, say, Emerson's Representative Men from Carlyle's Reroes and Rero- Worship. The same doubleness characterizes a number of the classic American autobiographies, which explicitly or implicitly view the life of the writer in the context of his times. Franklin, Henry Adams, and Richard Wright are cases in point. The hero (or anti-hero) is su eh essentially by virtue of his re-enact- ment of the national experience. To relate Transcendentalism's paradoxical attitude toward self-consciousness to the three traditions which informed it does not, however, explain the peculiarities of Transcendentalist style. One may still ask, for example, why the closest thing to The Prelude which the movement produced was Alcott's vapid New ConnecticutJ why the closest approach to Manfred was Ellery Channing's Eliot. How is it, too, that most of what the Transcendentalists wrote about themselves lacks both the fervor and the immediacy of such classics of spiritual self-analysis as Grace Abounding or the }ournal of George Fox? And why, in an age of intense national self-consciousness, didn't they take more of a literary interest in themselves as Americans, or at least N ew Englanders? To answer these questions fully would carry us far afield. Just as a start, we would need to make a complete juxtaposition of Transcendentalist aesthetics, religion, and social attitudes with those of the English romantics on the one hand and the rest of the New England intellectual establishment from the Mathers to the Adamses on the other. But an adequate concep- The First Person tion of literary self-consciousness in Transcendentalist writings, for our purposes, can be derived from picturing the Transcen- dentalists primarily as inheritors of the tradition of spiritual self-examination. Their lives were too interior for the third sort of approach; none were public figures, few were much inter- ested in politics or society except sporadically. Nor, as we have seen, were they greatly interested, like the English romantics, in the literary ordering of experience, except as a reflection of a prior ordering in nature and the life of the writer. Here again, the Transcendentalists differed from the English roman- tics in taking the notions of the latter more literally-in this case, the cult of sincerity.14 Their main motive for introspection was self-improvement, in which respect they were the heirs of the Puritans. The most obvious literary sign of this link is the diary. "In the tradition of New England," Petry Miller has said with little exaggeration, "it was respectable-nay, even imperative-that youths compose diaries." 15 In Edward T. Channing's rhetoric course at Harvard, one of the old standbys for paper topics was "The Advantages of Keeping a Joumal." Henry Thoreau duti- fully (and prophetically) noted three. In ascending order of importance they were: (1) "preservation of our scattered thoughts"; (2) self-expression; and inevitably (3) self-improve- ment.16 Whatever the direct influence of such environmental conditioning, every major Transcendentalist kept a diary and/ or commonplace book-Emerson, Alcott, Thoreau, Fullet, Parker, and Charles King Newcomb being the most significant 14 For an interesting parallel case, see Patricia M. Ball, The Central Self (London: Athlone Press, 1968), pp. 152-165, which argues that the Victorians extended the idea of sincerity far beyond what the Romantics had in mind. 15Introduction to Consciousness in Concord (Boston: Houghton Miffiin, 1958), p. 46. 16 F. B. Sanborn, The Life of Henry David Thoreau (Boston: Houghton Miffiin 1917), pp. 73-74, prints the essay. Self-Examination and A utobiographical Traditzon 275 writers in this vein. Like their forefathers, they approached journal-writing as a solemn task. "In thy journals let there never be a jestl" wrote Thoreau (JT, III, 222), and indeed there aren't many-certainly much fewer than in his essays. ]ournalizing was a more complex and difficult affair for the Transcendentalists than for their ancestors, however. The latter undeniably fretted more about the state of their souls, but they were sustained by a common and fairly clear-cut notion of the process of conversion and sanctification and the rhetoric with which to describe it. They did not have to ask who they were and what value of an individual was, but simply how they stood in relation to the state of grace-which was a big question, to be sure, but a much more clearly defined one. It is instructive to compare Transcendentalist journalizing with the spiritual diary of a latter-day Puritan who was their near contemporary, the Reverend Edward Payson of Portland, Maine (1783-1827), a saint well known in Orthodox circles of the day. Feb. 8 [1806]. There is no vice, of which 1 do not see the seeds in myself, and which would bear fruit, did not grace prevent. Not- withstanding this, 1 am perpetually pulling the mote out of my brother's eye. Feb. 9. Was much favored in prayer, and still more in reading the Bible. Every word seemed to come home with power. Of late, 1 have none of those rapturous feelings, which used to be so trans- porting; but 1 enjoya more calm and equable degree of comfort; and, though slowly, yet surely, find myself advancing. Feb. 16. Very dull and lifeless in the morning. Made a resolution to restrain my temper, and the next moment broke Ít. Felt more lively at meeting. In the afternoon and evening, was remarkably favored. 1 felt such an overwhelming sense of God's amazing good- ness, and my own unworthiness, as 1 never had before. . .. Feb. 19. What a poor, weak, unstable creature 1 am, when Christ is absent! Read Baxter's Saints' Rest; but, though it is very affect- ingly written, 1 was totally unmoved by it. The First Person Payson was, understandably, regarded by his audience as mor- bid but exhilaratingly pious.u The record of his emotional ups and downs gives an impression of hypersensitivity but also of unremitting steadfastness that is unapproached in Transcen- dentalist writing, except by the later journals of Thoreau. Most Transcendentalist diaries are comparatively varied and miscel- laneous in subject and style. They lack momentum; they are more interesting in patches than in their progressive unfolding. Payson should not, of course, be taken as typical of aH Puri- tan diarists; but he does epitomize the qualities which most differentiate traditional spiritual autobiography from what the Transcendentalists wrote. He was one of the last figures in the New England inteHectual establishment to be able to maintain, in aH its purity and naiveté, the conventional Calvinist self- image or persona of "the chief of sinners," to use Bunyan's phrase. The exact character of this persona varies from Bun- yan's self-flageHations to William Cowper's mild abjectness to jonathan Edwards' mystical adoration, but the type is recog- nizable. By 1830, however, this way of proceeding had begun to seem quaint and artificial, even to Calvinist readers. In explana- tion of the masochistic tone of another minister's diary, a re- viewer in The Spirit 01 the Pilgrims emphasized that "a "self-examiner, with pen in hand, is a very different creature from a self-examiner empty-handed." 18 The Reverend Henry Martyn castigated himself so unwontedly, the reviewer specu- lates, because he knew that his diary might sorne day be pub- lishedl Surely sorne of Cotton Mather's audience must have felt the same thing a century before; the interesting feature of the review is that the suspicion is publicly aired in a conservative sectarian journal. The Transcendentalists, who felt this sort of skepticism very 17 Asa Cummings, A Memoir of the Rev. Edward Payson, D.D., 5th ed. (Boston: Crocker and Brewster, 1832), p. 49-50, iv-v. 18 Review oE A Memoir of the Rev. Henry Martyn, Spirit of the Pilgrims, 4 (1831), 430. Self-Examination and A utobiographical Traditton keenly, distrusted not only the old rhetorical and doctrinal formulas, but also the very idea of a structured spiritual devel- opment. They did have a general conception of life as a process of spiritual improvement or self-culture, which they saw as being helped along by cultivation of morality and self-discipline, but what really excited them was not process or method but spiritual experience per se, the significant moment, the in tui- tive perception. Even sorne of those who paid most attention to empirical method, like Parker and Thoreau, were quick to point out the uselessness of that method in matters of faith or spiritual experience. This perhaps explains why none of the Transcendentalists, except for Brownson, ever wrote anything like a conversion narrative-that sort of fiction was simply too plot-oriented for their tastes. (On the other hand, their ina- bility to reduce their own spiritual lives to order may be one reason why they were addicted to writing memoirs of each other.) Speaking more generally, one might say that the shift in spiritual orientation made the element of self-consciousness in Transcendentalist writing more complex, more literary, and less intimate than in traditional spiritual autobiography. First and most obviously, the sense of self in Transcendentalisl writing is more complex because its field of inquiry is not centered in a supernatural frame of reference. "Well, & what do you project?" Emerson asks in his journal. "Nothing less than to look at every object in its relation to Myself" (JMN, IV, 272). Of course this objective is not exhaustively carried out, but one does see the Transcendentalists moving in this direc- tion, from an I-Thou relationship with Spirit to an I-Nature relationship; and to the extent that they do, their inner lives become more diffuse. Spiritual health now seems to consist in perceiving the divinity in as many different shapes as possible, not in regular encounters in one's prayer closet. Every circum- stance, every emotional nuance was potentially of spiritual im- port. In a sense the same was true for the Puritans, but the The First Person Transcendentalists differed in at least two ways. First, they carne closer to believing that all phenomena were of equal relevance (one recalls Emerson's insistence that a gnat is as good a metaphor for God as a Lord of Hosts); second, and more im- portant, the Transcendentalists felt actively compelled to seek out and perceive significance in phenomena. The sense of spiritual torpor which gave rise to much of the guilt-feeling in Payson and other Puritan self-examiners has its counterpart in Transcendentalist confessions of failure of perception. "Set ten men to write their journal for one day, and nine of them will leave out their thought, or proper result,-that is, their net experience,-and lose themselves in misreporting the supposed experience of other people" (W, VIII, 308). This remark of Emerson's is a new sort of complaint for the spiritual diarist: Edward Payson had his troubles but at least he did not have to question whether what he was recording was original with him. Equally significant are Transcendentalist confessions of ina- bility to synthesize or articulate their perceptions. "Thoughts of different dates will not cohere," Thoreau noted (lT, III, 288). Like Emerson, whose mixed feelings about his own incoherence have already been shown, Thoreau could only take refuge in the fact that Nature herself "strews her nuts and flowers broad· cast, and never collects them into heaps" (1, 200). The pages of the most voluminous journalizer of the group, Aleott, are filled with similar confessions of inadequacy. At times he is smug: "No important thought, emotion, or purpose, has transpired within me, that has not been noted therein," he says of his diary for the first haH of 1839. But by the end of the year he discovers that though "1 have written out myself more fully during this, than any previous year of my life," "my chronicle gives me little satisfaction. I do not yet copy the best passages of my spiritual being. 1 have not yet mastered the art of drawing. . . . I am a spectre moving in Infinitude, devoid of flesh & blood." 19 19 Aleott, "Diary froro January to JuIy 1839," p. 948. MS 59M-308 (12); "Diary for 1839 froro JuIy to Decerober," p. 502, MS 59M-308 (13). Houghton Library. Harvard University. Self-Examination and A utobiographical Tradition As the foregoing examples show, the journals of Emerson, Thoreau, and Aleott-like much of Transcendentalist writing -aspire to an encyclopedic quality, to take in the whole range of human experience, which inevitably they fail to do. They are defeated by their own commitment to spontaneity, to recording their impressions moment by momento One is left in each case with the image of a somewhat nebulous, unformed sou!. The same is true al so of Theodore Parker's diary, whose most com- mon motif is "1 know not what will come of it," 20 and the surviving fragments of Margaret Fuller's journal in the Memoirs 01 Margaret Fuller Ossoli. In the journals of Ellery Channing and Charles King Newcomb, the sense of frustration erupts into self-loathing. Both feel the awkwardness of writing about themselves; both are plagued by the awareness of the superficiality of their records. "Indefinite 1 was born-indefinite 1 shall die," wails Channing.21 The sorts of complaints we have just been hearing point to a much more literary interest in journalizing than had tradition- ally been the case. Witness Aleott's desire to master "the art of drawing." Although their immediate purpose for writing diaries was to preserve their memorable experiences and explain them- selves to themselves, all except for Parker had the long-range hope of using this material for literary purposes. Aleott, for 20 Parker's is the only major Transcendentalist journal which is yet unpublished, except in very brief excerpts. It consists of sorne twenty-two volurnes, covering the period 1835 to 1860, aH but one of which are housed in the Library of Congress, the Andover-Harvard Theological Library, or the Massachusetts Historical Society. (For a list of Parker's journals and where each is located, see Herbert Hudson, "Recent Interpretations of Parker: An Evaluation of the Literature Since 1936," Proceedings 01 the Unitarian Historical Society, 13 [1960], 38). Parker journalized irregularly, interspersing notes frorn his reading, sermon outlines, and autobiographi· cal tidbits. The result is not of great literary interest, but does shed con· siderable light on Parker and Transcendentalism generaIly, as do Parker's unpublished letters. 21 Ms. Journal, "Qut-of·door Life," p. 9, bMS Arn 800.6, Houghton Library. The First Person example, praised "the habit of journalizing" as "a life-Iong les- son taken in the art of composition, an informal schooling for authorship." 22 Thoreau declared quite frankly his intent "to set down such choice experiences that my own writings may inspire me and at last I may make wholes of parts" (IT, III, 217). Emerson saw his journal as a "Savings Bank" (lMN, IV, 250). Hence one often finds the Transcendentalist journalizers applying a considerable degree of craftsmanship to copying and recopying, revising, indexing, excerpting "gems" and trans- ferring them to other notebooks. In Aleott's journal especially are frequent entries of this sort: "1 write Diary all day," "Copy Diary," "1 write Diary aH day again," etc. (fA, p. 305-306). The characteristic Transcendentalist pattern of composition, estab- lished by Emerson and imitated with varying degrees of success by Aleott, Thoreau, and Channing, was of course a threefold pracess of revision from journal to lecture to essay. The literary pretensions of the Transcendentalist diarists help to explain why their journals are less intimate than those of their forbears. Certainly Payson lays bare his heart a great de al more extensively than Emerson and Thoreau. As Aleott said of Emerson, Transcendentalist journals might better be caHed "commonplace books," if one extends that term to apply not only to passages culled fram other authors but choice insights of the writer's own. Emerson's journals, as Aleott noted, "are full of elegant sketches of life and nature. . . . He does not record the history of his facts, but idealizes whatsoever he ob- serves and writes his thought in this general formo He works like an artist from his sketches and models" (lA, p. 126). Again the metaphor of the journalizer as artist. We must be careful of stereotyping here: Aleott's own journals, despite his literary aspirations, differ fram Emerson's in including a great amount of biographical and autobiographical trivia-which is what makes them the single richest storehouse of Transcendentalist gossip ever written. In this respect, Aleott and Emerson stand 22 Bronson Alcott, Table-Talk (Boston: Roberts, 1877), p. 12. Self-Examination and Autobiographical Tradition almost at opposite poles among Transcendentalist journalizers and dramatize the considerable variety which did in fact exist among them. Nevertheless Aleott too is clearIy more interested in memorializing his ideas, his significant perceptions, than he is in painting a full-Iength, flesh-and-blood portrait of himself like a Boswell or a Rousseau. The interest is not to be explained only or even primarily in terms of the diarist's literary objectives, of course. The basic reason for it is religious. In traditional religious confessional the entity of the self (one aspect of it, that is) is necessarily more particularized than in Transcendentalist writing, because the main subject of interest is the dealings of God with a particular so-and-so, whereas for the Transcendentalist the primary subject is the relation of mankind, of which so-and-so is a representative, to the rest of the universe. On the face of it, to argue in this manner that the Transcendentalists were less interested in the self than the Puritans seems quite paradoxical, given the fact that the former proclaimed the potential divinity of the indi- vidual and the latter were neo-Calvinists. The solution seems to lie, first, in the Transcendentalists' distrust of supernatural- ism: for instance, particular providences and the doctrine of election. As democrats in the spiritual realm they did not be- lieve in a special relationship between an individual and a personal God, or if they did (and Parker, Fuller and Aleott in old age are cases in point) they felt it most important to stress the universality of such an experience. SimilarIy they were less likely to interpret phenomena in the visible universe as having explicit reference to themselves and their community. In the second place, because of their more liberal religious views the Transcendentalists were also less liable to experience the overwhelming soul-struggles which make traditional con- fessions from Augustine to Bunyan to Payson seem such "per- sonal" documents. They do of course confess to feelings of spiritual malaise, but for the most part they exhibit a basic serenity or optimism about their spiritual state which keeps The First Person their vision focused on the design of the universe rather than their own alienation from it. In concluding this discussion of Transcendentalist literary self-consciousness, we might briefly look beyond the genre of spiritual self-examination and také note of how, in general, the Transcendentalists fit into the trend toward increasing self-con- sciousness in western literature as a whole during the nineteenth century. For it was the century between roughly 1750 and 1850 that saw the emergence of biography, autobiography, fictional characterization, and lyric poetry in the modern senses. Authorities on the subject of autobiographical writing agree that the most distinctive feature of the modern period is its em- phasis on the self in all its psychological complexity. For John N. Morris there is a direct link between spiritual self-examination and this modern attitude: essentially" 'seU' is the modern word for ·soul.' " Morris regards Wordsworth and John Stuart MilI, for example, as repeating in a secular context "the religious melancholy and conversions set down in the autobiographies of earlier heroes of religion." 23 Of course there is a difference in kind between the paradigmatic quality of the confessant's spiri- tual development and the sense of the unfolding of a unique self in such writers as Rousseau and MilI. Wayne Shumaker has a provocative explanation for this on philosophical grounds: Until a mechanistic or naturalistic universe carne to be posited, it was impossible that autobiography should attempt to account lor the personal uniqueness of its subject. ... But when determinism began increasingly, and, among authors, almost regularly, to be postulated of human life, as well as of nonhuman nature, autobiog- raphers-many of whom, like Darwin, Huxley, Galton, Bray, MilI, Spencer, and Wallace, were either scientists or scientific phil oso· phers-began to feel it their duty not only to describe how the in- 23 Versions of the Self, pp. 6, 5. Self-Examination and A utobiographical Traditzon dividual life was lived, but also to explain why it was necessarily lived so and not otherwise.24 This hypothesis is clearly oversimple (for example, there is a kind of determinism operative in Calvinist thought), but it is useful as a way of pointing up the nature and limits of Tran- scendentalist self-consciousness and, 1 think, of the romantic movement in general. The Transcendentalists started with the conception of the individual as unique and the intention of formulating their own special views of the world empirically by accumulating significant perceptions; but they were resolved not to rest in the conception of a deterministic universe and a spiritually isolated individual which eighteenth-century thought seemed to impose upon them and which to later generations seemed inevitable. Their interest quickly shifted, therefore, from phenomena which evidenced personal uniqueness to that which evidenced the divinity or the universality of the individ- ual. All the writers we are about to examine are deeply in- terested in converting the "1" from a fallible personality into an authoritative voice. Emerson prophesies; Thoreau creates a semiautobiographical hero; Very identifies himself with the Trinity; Whitman projects himself as a mythic figure. We must now see how these strategies work in detail. 24 English Autobiography, pp. 89-90.