The Atlantic and the American Identity 
Carol T. Fletcher
Journal of Magazine Media, Volume 13, Number 2, Summer 2012,  (Review)
Published by University of Nebraska Press
For additional information about this article
[ Access provided at 12 Feb 2021 02:20 GMT from JHU Libraries ]
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/773728/summary
 The Atlantic	  
	  
 
Journal of Magazine & New Media Research   1 
Vol. 13, No. 2 • Summer 2012 
	  
Book Review: The Atlantic and the American Identity  
 
Carol T. Fletcher, Hofstra University 
Carol.T.Fletcher@hofstra.edu 
 
Republic of Words: The Atlantic Monthly and Its Writers,  1857-1925 . Susan 
Goodman. Lebanon, N.H.: University Press of New England, 2011, 330 pp. hardback. 
 
In the wake of one of the bloodiest battles of the Civil War, Oliver Wendell Holmes 
received a telegram announcing that his son had been “shot through the neck” at the Battle 
of Antietam. A physician and writer, Holmes knew just how dire such an injury could be. 
He set off on a frantic journey to find his son, whom he pictured wasting away uncared for 
and alone. 
In truth, the 21-year-old future Supreme Court justice was being nursed to health on 
a feather bed by a farmer’s wife. Later, after the senior Holmes finally found his son in a 
Pennsylvania train station, he wrote about the incident in The Atlantic Monthly.  
Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., was furious, writes author Susan Goodman in her 
account of the events. The junior Holmes, having been shot retreating from a battle where 
23,000 lost their lives, resented his father’s profiting from the war, criticized his collecting of 
souvenirs from battle sites, and mocked his “frivolous” Fireside poetry and the naiveté of his 
armchair patriotism. 
The competing perspectives of father and son presaged the struggle the country 
would face as it attempted to re-create its national narrative during Reconstruction and 
beyond. And forging a national consciousness was an overarching mission of The Atlantic 
Monthly, argues Susan Goodman in her authoritative history of the magazine—Republic of 
Words: The Atlantic Monthly and Its Writers, 1857-1925.  
Indeed, when an elite group of Bostonians (including Holmes, Sr., Ralph Waldo 
Emerson, and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow) met at the Parker House on the brink of the 
Civil War to found The Atlantic Monthly, Goodman notes that they explicitly envisioned a 
magazine that would, in the words of its first editor, James Russell Lowell, “be the exponent 
of what its conductors believe to be the American ideal.”  
 
From the beginning, it was a magazine of politics and literature that strove to educate 
and reflect America, to welcome contrary ideas but often to promote the liberal, to represent 
all the country but to trade on Boston’s cultural capital. In a book both scholarly and 
revealing, Goodman tells the story of The Atlantic through the works and personalities of its 
editors and writers, including many of the most influential names in American literature— 
 
 
Carol Fletcher is an associate professor of journalism, media studies, and public relations at 
Hofstra University. 
 The Atlantic	  
	  
 
Journal of Magazine & New Media Research   2 
Vol. 13, No. 2 • Summer 2012 
	  
Harriet Beecher Stowe, John Greenleaf Whittier, Bret Harte, Mark Twain, Henry David 
Thoreau, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Henry James, W.E.B. Du Bois, Booker T. Washington, 
Edith Wharton, Robert Frost, John Steinbeck, Jack London, Ernest Hemingway, and 
Virginia Woolf…to name just a few. 
Early Atlantic editors cultivated writers and were in turn supported by their 
publishing houses, helping ensure the survival of the fledgling magazine at a time when 
reams of others folded. As Goodman notes, Lowell believed the magazine should “have 
opinions…and not be afraid to speak them.” Over the years, The Atlantic would publish 
essays by Darwinist Asa Gray and Harvard’s popular anti-Darwinist Louis Agassiz, by 
apologist for American slavery Nathaniel Shaler and civil rights activist W.E.B. Du Bois, by 
pacifist Bertrand Russell and Margaret Prescott Montague, who praised Woodrow Wilson’s 
decision to enter World War I.  
The magazine believed in the power of American literary realism to help create a 
national identity and, Goodman notes, expand that identity by seeking writers who were 
women, Westerners, and foreigners. Atlantic naturalists helped foster an America in awe of 
its natural inheritance, while the magazine’s muckrakers fostered empathy for the plight of its 
oppressed populations.  
The magazine took risks—not always without cost. In 1869 then editor James Fields 
allowed Harriet Beecher Stowe, the most famous woman in America, to contribute the essay 
“The True Story of Lady Byron’s Life.” In it, Stowe defended her late friend, who had been 
blamed for her husband’s philandering, by accusing Lord Byron of having had an incestuous 
relationship with his half-sister. The piece, which Goodman notes was replete with errors, 
outraged readers and cost The Atlantic almost a third of its 50,000 subscribers. 
Nor was the magazine always first in recognizing new talent. In the early 1900s the 
magazine was edited by Ellery Sedgwick, whose leanings were more political than literary, 
Goodman writes. (He published an indictment of the Sacco-Vanzetti verdict, for instance.) 
But when Sedgwick read Robert Frost’s first submission to the magazine, he saw no value in 
the poetry and sent the author a definitive rejection letter. Later, after the poet had gained 
his reputation in Europe, Frost happily recounted how Sedgwick invited him to The Atlantic 
offices and begged for his poems. Frost relented, handing over three, including “The Road 
Not Taken,” for which he was paid $55.  
The Atlantic bore an influence that often exceeded its circulation. In 1903, writes 
Goodman, The Saturday Evening Post’s circulation was 1 million. Two decades later The 
Atlantic succeeded in topping 100,000. Soon The Atlantic would be challenged by the 
youthful, urbane upstart The New Yorker. Yet throughout The Atlantic’s history, writers 
understood the panache of publishing in the magazine, which retained its authority, says 
Goodman, “partly from its mission to hold the nation to a higher idea and partly from 
example, which assured readers that even the most daunting problems could be resolved 
through meaningful dialogue.” 
 The Atlantic	  
	  
 
Journal of Magazine & New Media Research   3 
Vol. 13, No. 2 • Summer 2012 
	  
A Guggenheim Fellow and H. Fletcher Brown Chair of Humanities at the University 
of Delaware, Goodman has also written biographies of Edith Wharton and William Dean 
Howells. In this, her seventh book, she offers an insightful and meticulously documented 
history not only of The Atlantic Monthly and the changing publishing world in which it 
operated over seven decades but also of an evolving American identity.  
Goodman writes that “what the Atlantic achieved that no other magazine before or 
after has managed to achieve—whether the Nation, Scribner’s, the New Republic, or the New 
Yorker—was a grasp of implicitly ‘American’ aspirations, in a format that combined high 
literary excellence with political, ethical, and educational imperatives.” Her book should 
prove equally attractive to the literary critic, casual Atlantic reader, and serious student of 
American intellectual history.  
